[Page 1]
CAMEROUN
Labour Code
Law No. 92/007 of 14 August 1992
PART I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1: (1) This law shall govern labour relations between
wage-earners and employers as well as between employers and
apprentices under their supervision.
(2) In this law, "worker" shall mean any person, irrespective of
sex or nationality, who has undertaken to place his services in
return for remuneration, under the direction and control of
another person, whether an individual or a public or private
corporation, considered as the "employer". For the purpose of
determining whether a person is a worker, non account shall be
taken of the legal position of employer or employee.
(3) This law shall not apply to staff governed by :
• - the General Rules and Regulations of the Public Service;
• - the Rules and Regulations governing the Judicial and Legal
Service;
• - the General Rules and Regulations governing Servicemen;
• - the Special Rules and Regulations of the National Security;
• - the Special Rules and Regulations of Prison Administration
Civil Servants;
• - the special provisions applicable to auxiliary staff.
Section 2: (1) The right to work shall be recognized as a basic
right of each citizen. The State shall therefore make every effort
to help citizens to find and secure their employment.
(2) Work shall also be a national duty incumbent on every able-
bodied adult citizen.
(3) Forced or compulsory labour shall be forbidden.
(4) "Forced or compulsory labour" shall mean any labour or
service demanded of an individual under threat of penalty, being

[Page 2]
a labour or service which the individual has not freely offered to
perform.
(5) However, the expression "forced or compulsory labour" shall
not include :
• 1. any work or service exacted by virtue of compulsory
military service laws and regulations for work of a purely
military nature;
• 2. any work or service in the general interest forming part of
the civic obligations of citizens as defined by the laws and
regulations ;
• 3. any work or service exacted from any person as a
consequence of a conviction in a court of law ;
• 4. any work or service exacted in cases of force majeure,
that is to say, in the event of war, disaster or threatened
disaster, such as fire, flood, severe violent epidemic or
epizootic diseases, invasion by animals, insects or plant
pests, and in general, any occurrence that would endanger
or threaten to endanger the existence of the well-being of all
or part of the population.

PART II
TRADE UNIONS AND EMPLOYERS' ASSOCIATIONS
CHAPTER I
PURPOSES OF TRADE UNIONS AND EMPLOYERS'
ASSOCIATIONS AND THEIR ESTABLISHMENT
Section 3: The law recognizes the right of workers and
employers, without distinction whatsoever, to set up freely and
without prior authorization (trade unions or employers'
associations), associations for the study, defence, promotion and
protection of their interests, particularly those of an economic,
industrial, commercial or agricultural nature, and for the social,
economic, cultural and moral advancement of their members.

[Page 3]
All activity by such unions and associations which is not
connected with the furtherance of the above objectives shall be
prohibited.
Section 4: (1) Every worker and employer shall have the right to
join a trade union or employers' association of his own choice in
his occupation or kind of business.
(2) Workers shall be protected from :
• (a) any acts of anti-union discrimation in respect of their
employment;
• (b) any practice tending :
o - to make their employment subject to their
membership or non-membership in a trade union ;
o - to cause their dismissal or other prejudice by reason
of union membership or non-membership or
participation in union activities.
(3) Any act contrary to the provisions of this section shall be null
and void.
Section 5: (1) Workers' and employers' organizations shall have
the right to draw up their constitutions and rules, to elect their
representatives freely and to organize their administration,
provided they respect the laws and regulations in force.
(2) Workers' and employers' organizations shall be forbidden to
interfere in each other's activities.
Section 6: (1) A trade union or employer's association shall not
have legal existence until the day on which a certificate of
registration has been issued to it by the registrar of trade unions
and employers' associations.
(2) Any person forming a trade union or employers' association
that has not yet been registered and who acts as if the said union
or association has been registered shall be liable to prosecution.
(3) The registrar of trade unions and employers' association shall
be a civil servant appointed by decree.
Section 7: (1) No one shall be a member of a trade union unless
he is in fact gainfully employed at the time of his joining it.

[Page 4]
(2) However, a person who has ceased to be gainfully occupied
may continue to be a member of his trade union, provided :
• 1. he has carried on his occupation for at least (6) six
months, and
• 2. he is engaged in union activity or is appointed by virtue of
his occupation to a post for which provision is made by laws
and regulations.
Section 8: Every application for registration of a trade union or
employers' association shall be signed by at least 20 members if
it is a workers' union or at least 5 members if it is an employers'
association. The rules of trade unions and employers' associations
shall comply with the provisions of this law.
Section 9: The form under which trade unions or employers'
associations shall be set up in order for them to be registered
shall be fixed by decree after the recommendation of the National
Labour Advisory Board.
Section 10: (1) The persons applying for registration of a trade
union or employers' association and the members responsible for
its administration and management shall be in possession of their
civic rights and shall be convicted of any offence involving a
penalty laid down in Section 30 (1), (2) and (3) of the Penal
Code.
(2) Aliens shall be required in addition to have resided for not less
than five years in the territory of the Republic of Cameroon.
Section 11: (1) Registration of a trade union or employers'
association shall be effected as follows :
• (a) an application to register the union or association and its
rules shall be sent to the registrar of trade unions or
employers' association ; the application shall be
accompanied by two copies of the rules and a list of the
names of the officers of the union or association and of their
titles as such ;
• (b) the registrar shall acknowledge receipt of the
application, examine it and register the trade union or
association and its rules within a period of one month. After

[Page 5]
that deadline, the trade union or association shall be
considered as having been registered.
• (c) The registrar shall not register any trade union or
employers' association under a name identical to that under
which any existing union or employers' association has been
registered as may lead members of the unions or
association or third parties into error.
(2) A decree shall determine the form of the certificate of
registration.
Section 12: (1) If the application for registration does not
comply with the conditions, the registrar shall inform the
applicants of his observations in writing and request them to re-
submit the application.
(2) Upon receipt of the resubmitted application the registrar shall
either register the trade union or, if he refuses to do so, notify in
writing within thirty days, the applicants of his refusal and the
reasons therefor.
Section 13: (1) The registrar may cancel the registration of a
trade union or employers' association if it is established :
• (a) that the certificate of the registration was obtained by
fraud;
• (b) that the registered union or association has wilfully
violated any provision of this law or carried out non-
statutory activities ;
• (c) that the registered union or association has ceased to
exist.
(2) Before such cancellation is effected, the registrar shall give
the union or association concerned two months' notice specifying
the reason for his decision.
(3) Whenever a registrar cancels the registration of a trade union
or employers' association, he must make known the steps he has
taken by adequate publicity, and especially by publishing the
decision in the Official Gazette.
Section 14: Any trade union, member of a trade union or person
feeling aggrieved by a decision of the registrar to refuse or to

[Page 6]
cancel registration of a trade union or employers' association
may, within thirty (30) days of notification of such decision, refer
the matter to the competent court, the judgement of which shall
be open to appeal. The registrar shall be entitled to be heard at
any stage of the proceedings.

CHAPTER II
RULES OF TRADE UNIONS AND EMPLOYERS' ASSOCIATION
Section 15: The rules of every trade union and employers'
association shall comprise the following provisions :
• (a) The name of the union or association and its registered
office ;
• (b) The purposes for which the union or association is
established;
• (c) The intended purpose of the funds and the percentage of
contributions earmarked for social work ;
• (d) The procedure for establishing, amending or rescinding
the rules ;
• (e) The procedure for appointing and removing the Union or
Association leaders from office, as well as sanctions which
may be meted to members ;
• (f) The prohibition to elect as President, Secretary or
Treasurer or to any other office, a person who can neither
read nor write English or French ;
• (g) A Provision for the keeping of a nominal roll of members
showing the trade, profession or usual occupation of each
member and, if need be, the name of the employers ;
• (h) Provisions for the investment of the funds or their
deposit in a bank and for an annual or more frequent audit
of accounts;
• (i) provisions for the keeping of full and accurate accounts
by the treasurer, the regular audit of such of a statement
accounts by persons so empowered and the distribution to
members, who so request, of accounts prepared at least
once a year by a qualified accountant;
• (j) The procedure of dissolving the union or association, the
manner of devolving its assets it being understood that they
shall not in any way whatsoever be shared to the members.

[Page 7]

CHAPTER III
SUNDRY PROVISIONS RESPECTING TRADE UNIONS AND
EMPLOYERS' ASSOCIATIONS
Section 16: (1) Every registered trade union and employers'
association shall have an office to which all correspondance and
notices may be addressed. The address of the said office shall be
notified to the registrar within thirty days of its opening and any
change of address shall likewise be notified to the registrar within
thirty days of the change.
(2) If any registered trade union of employers' association is in
operation for three months without having such an office, it shall
be liable to the penalty provided under Section 166 of the law.
Section 17: Trade unions and employers' associations shall enjoy
legal status. They shall have the right to go to law and to acquire
movable and immovable property, by way of gift or purpose
without authorization.
Section 18: (1) Trade unions and employers' associations may :
• (a) exercise in any court the rights reserved to civil action
plaintiffs in criminal proceedings, in relation to acts causing
direct or indirect prejudice to the collective interest of the
trade or occupation which they represent;
• (b) allocate a part of their resources to the buildings of
workers' dwelling or the purchase of lands for cultivation or
sports grounds for the use of their members ;
• (c) Establish, administer or make grants to institutions
serving to trade or occupation such as provident schemes,
solidarity funds, laboratories, experimental farming stations,
schemes for scientific, agricultural or social education,
courses and publications in matters concerning the trade or
occupation;
the movable and immovable property required for their
meetings, libraries and vocational instruction courses shall
be exempt from attachment;
• (d) make grants to producer or consumer co-operative
societies ;

[Page 8]
• (e) make contracts or agreements with any other trade
unions, employers' associations, companies, undertakings or
persons.
(2) If they are so authorized by their rules and on condition that
they make no distribution of profits (even by way of rebate)
among their members, trade unions and employers' association
may also :
• (a) purchase, with a view to hiring out, lending or
distribution to their members, anything that is necessary for
the trade or occupation, including raw material, tools,
implements, machinery, fertilizers, seeds, plants, animals
and feed for cattle ;
• (b) provide a free service for the sale of products derived
exclusively from the personal labour or holdings of the
members, and promote such sale by means of exhibitions,
advestisements, publications, group orders and deliveries,
but not by carrying out the selling operation in their own
name and on their own responsibility.
Section 19: An act done by a person duly authorized by a union
in furtherance of a trade dispute may be actionable only if it
induces some other person to break a contract of employment or
interferes with the right of some other person to dispose of his
capital or his labour as he wished.
Section 20: (1) The representative character of a trade union or
employers' association shall, as and when necessary, be
established by order of the minister in charge of labor having
regard to the following considerations :
• (a) in the case of a trade union, total number of members :
• (b) for an employers' association, the total number of
workers employed.
(2) The administrative courts shall be competent to consider any
objection raised by a trade union or employers' association
against a decision on this matter.
Section 21: (1) An employer shall be permitted to deduct from
the wages earned by a worker under his control the ordinary
trade union contribution due from the worker, provided that the

[Page 9]
employer immediately pays the contribution so deducted to the
trade union specified by the worker.
(2) The said deduction of contributions at source shall be
permitted only :
• (a) if an agreement to that effect has been concluded
between the employer concerned and the trade union to
which the contributions are to be paid.
• (b) If the worker has agreed with such procedure by signing
a form jointly accepted by the employer and the trade
union, or if he can neither read nor write, by affixing his
finger prints.
(3) In addition :
• (a) The worker's consent may be withdrawn by him at any
time ; such withdrawal shall have effect in regard to the
month following that in which it is made ;
• (b) The said consent may be renewed by tacit agreement if
it is not withdrawn, except in the case of a change in the
amount of the contribution ;
• (c) The expense incurred by the employer in deducting and
paying over the contributions may be reimbursed by the
trade union concerned in accordance with arrangements
jointly agreed by the union and the employer.

CHAPTER IV
FEDERATIONS OF TRADE UNIONS AND EMPLOYERS'
ASSOCIATIONS
Section 22: (1) Trade unions and employers' associations which
have been duly established shall be free to act in union for the
purpose set out in Section 3 of this law.
(2) They may form federations of any kind and under any name.
Such federations shall comply with the provisions of the previous
chapters.

[Page 10]
(3) The rules of a federation shall determine the manner in which
the affiliated trade unions and employers' associations shall be
represented at the level of all the organs.
(4) Such federations shall enjoy all the rights and have the
benefit of all the protective measures granted to trade unions and
employers' associations.

PART III
CONTRACTS OF EMPLOYMENT
CHAPTER I
INDIVIDUAL CONTRACTS OF EMPLOYMENT
I - General Provisions
Section 23: (1) A contract of employment shall be an agreement
by which a worker undertakes to put his services under the
authority and management of an employer against remuneration.
(2) Contracts of employment shall be negotiated freely.
Section 24: (1) Irrespective of the place where the contract is
made and the place of residence of either party, every contract of
employment which is to be performed in Cameroon shall be
governed by the provisions of this law.
(2) The above rule shall apply in case of partial performance in
Cameroon of a contract initially made under other legislation. It
shall not apply, however, to a worker who is sent on secondment
for a period not exceeding 6 (six) months.
(3) Subject to the provisions of section 27, the existence of the
contract may be recorded in whatever manner the contracting
parties find convenient. Any form of evidence may be adduced in
proof of its existence.
(4) Written contracts shall be exempted from all stamp and
registration fees.

[Page 11]
II - Conclusion and performance of contracts
Section 25: (1) A contract of employment may be concluded for
a specified or unspecified duration.
• (a) A contract of specified duration is a contract whose
termination is fixed in advance by both parties. It may not
concluded for a duration of more than (2) two years
renewable once.
The following shall be considered contracts of employment
of a specified but non-renewable period :
o - a contract whose termination is subject to the
occurence, which does not depend exclusively on the
will of the parties, of a future but certain event that is
precisely indicated;
o - a contract concluded for the execution of a specified
task.
• (b) A contract of an unspecified period is a contract whose
termination is not fixed in advance and may be terminated
at any time by the will of the worker or the employer,
provided that the prior notice referred to in Section 34 below
is given.
(2) The contract of foreign workers shall be renewed only after
endorsement by the minister in charge of labour.
(3) Contracts of specified duration of Cameroonian workers shall
be renewed only once with the same company. At the expiry of
such renewal, if working relations continue, the contract shall be
transformed into one of unspecified duration.
(4) The above provisions shall not apply to workers recruited to
carry out exclusively :
• (a) a temporary job in replacement of an absent worker or
one whose contract has been suspended, or the completion
of a piece of work within a specific timelimit and requiring
additional manpower.
• (b) an occasional job aimed at coping with unexpected
growth in the activities of the company as a result of certain
economic conditions or entailing urgent works to prevent
imminent accidents, organizing emergency measures or

[Page 12]
repairing company equipment, facilities or buildings which
are dangerous for the workers ;
• (c) a seasonal job generated by the cyclical or climatic
nature of company activities.
(5) The employment conditions of the workers referred to in
preceding paragraph shall be laid down by decree issued after
consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board.
Section 26: (1) The workers referred to in Section 25 (4) above
may be recruited by a temporary job contractor.
(2) A temporary job contractor shall mean any individual or
corporate body whose sole activity consists in temporarily
providing users with workers whom they recruit and pay.
(3) The workers referred to in the preceding Subsection may be
hired only for temporary jobs and solely in the cases laid down in
Section 25 (4),
(4) The founding of a temporary job company shall be subject to
the prior approval of the minister in charge of labour.
(5) The contract of employment between the temporary job
contractor and a worker provided to a user must be written.
(6) Each worker placed at the disposal of a user must conclude a
written temporary transfer contract with the temporary job
contractor. The duration of such contract shall not exceed 1 (one)
year with the same user.
(7) The conditions of implementation of this section shall be laid
down by decree issued after consultation with the National Labour
Advisory Board.
Section 27 : (1) Every contract of employment of specified
duration exceeding three months, or requiring the worker to live
away from his usual place of residence, shall be written. A copy of
the contract shall be forwarded to the Labour Inspector of the
area.
(2) A contract of employment concerning a worker of foreign
nationality must be endorsed by the Minister in charge of Labour
previously to commencement thereof.

[Page 13]
(3) The application of endorsement shall be made by the
employer. Where such endorsement is refused, the contract shall
be null and void.
(4) Where the Minister in charge of Labour fails to announce a
decision within the two months immediately following reception of
the application for endorsement, the contract shall be deemed to
have been endorsed.
(5) The conditions of implementation of this section shall be laid
down by decree issued after consultation with the National Labour
Advisory Board.
Section 28 : (1) There shall be probationary hiring where, prior
to signing a final contract, the employer and the worker agree to
appraise in particular, the worker's quality of services and his
output, as concerns the employer and as concerns the worker,
the working, living, wage, safety and hygiene conditions as well
as the climate under the employer.
(2) Any probationary hiring must be stipulated in writing. Such
hiring shall not be made for a period exceeding that required for
trying out newly engaged personnel, taking into account the
techniques and practices of the trade or occupation. Under no
circumstances shall probationary hiring exceed six months,
including any renewal, save in the case of managerial staff for
whom the period may be extended to eight months.
(3) The time required for recruitment, travelling, training and
probation shall not be included in the maximum duration of the
trial period.
(4) The cost of repatriation of displaced workers shall be defrayed
by the employer regardless of the reason for termination.
(5) Where the worker's employment is maintained beyond expiry
of a probationary hiring contract and here no new contract is
made, the parties shall be deemed to have entered into a final
contract taking effect from the beginning of the trial period.
(6) An order of the Minister in charge of Labour issued after
consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board shall fix the
conditions of probationary hiring.

[Page 14]
Section 29 : (1) The internal regulations shall be drawn up by
the company head. They shall deal exclusively with rules relating
to the technical organization of work, disciplinary standards and
procedure, safety and hygiene at work which are necessary for
the proper functioning of the company.
(2) If any other regulations are included (in particular, regulations
respecting remuneration) they shall be deemed to be null and
void, subject to the provisions of Section 68 (4) of this law.
(3) Before enforcing the internal regulations, the company head
shall be communicate them to the staff representatives (if any)
for their opinion and for endorsement to the Labour Inspector of
the area who may order the deletion of or amendment to any
provisions which may be repugnant to the laws and regulations.
(4) An order of the minister in charge of labour issued after
consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board shall
prescribe the procedure for communicating, registering and
posting up the internal regulations as well as the number of
company workers above which the existence of such regulations
shall be compulsory.
Section 30 : (1) Employers shall be prohibited from imposing
fines.
(2) The only disciplinary penalty entailing loss of wages which an
employer may inflict shall be suspension from work with loss of
benefits.
(3) Suspension from work shall be null and void unless the
following conditions have been met simultaneously ;
• (a) that it shall be for a maximum period of eight working
days as from the time the penalty is inflicted ;
• (b) that the worker shall be notified in writing of the
suspension and the reasons therefor.
• (c) the the Labour Inspector of the area shall be informed of
the suspension within forty-eight hours.
Where the reasons for the suspension are found to be insufficient
by the court, the worker against whom the suspension was
pronounced shall be paid a compensatory allowance

[Page 15]
corresponding to the lost wages, and where applicable, damages,
if he adduces proof that as a result of the suspension, he suffered
further damages, in addition to his lost wages.
Section 31 : (1) The worker shall devote all his gainful activity to
the udertaking, save as otherwise stipulated in the contract :
provided that he may, unless otherwise agreed, undertake
outside his working hours any gainful activity which is not liable
to compete with the undertaking or prejudicial to the due
performance of the agreed services.
(2) However, it may be stipulated by agreement, between the
parties that in the event of a breach of contract, the worker shall
not engage, on his own account or on the account of another
person, in any activity liable to compete with the employer in
either of the following cases ;
• (a) If the contract is broken by the worker and the employer
has defrayed the travel expenses from the worker's place of
residence to the place of work ;
• (b) If the contract is broken in consequence of a serious
offence committed by the worker.
(3) Any such prohibition shall not apply outside a radius of 50
kilometres from the worker's workplace and its duration shall not
exceed one year.
III - Suspension and Termination of the Contract
Section 32 : A contract of employment shall be suspended :
• (a) if the establishment is closed by reason of the departure
of the employer to undertake military service for any
reason;
• (b) during the worker's military service or any period of
recall for military service for any reason ;
• (c) during the worker's absence in the case of illness duly
certified by a medical practitioner approved by the employer
or one belonging to a hospital establishment recognized by
the State, for a period not exceeding six months ; this
period shall be extended until such time as the worker is
replaced ;

[Page 16]
• (d) during the period of maternity leave provided for by
Section 84;
• (e) during any period of disciplinary suspension of the
worker, decided in accordance with Section 30 ;
• (f) during any period of leave for worker's education as
defined in Section 91 ;
• (g) during the period of unavailability following an industrial
accident or occupational disease ;
• (h) by mutual consent, during the exercise of political or
administrative duties following an election or appointment;
• (i) during the period when the worker is under police
custody or in preventive detention ;
• (j) during the absence of a worker who has to follow his her
spouse who has changed his her usual place of residence if
such worker cannot be transferred. The duration shall be
limited to two years, which may be renewed by mutual
agreement between the two parties.
• (k) during a period of lay-off not exceeding six months. Lay-
off shall mean the collective interruption of all or part of the
work by the personnel of an undertaking due to accidents or
force majeure or an unfavourable economic situation.
Section 33 : (1) In each of the cases (a), (b) and (c) referred to
in Section 32 above, the employer shall be bound to pay to the
worker, if the contract is of unspecified duration, compensation
equal either to the compensation in lieu of notice when the period
of absence is equal to or exceeds the period of notice, or to the
remuneration to which the worker would have been entitled
during his absence when the period of absence is shorter than the
notice period provided for in Section 34.
(2) In the same cases, if the contract is of specified duration, the
compensation shall be granted within the above limits, by
reference to the notice provided for contracts of unspecified
duration, the length of service being deemed to run from the
start of the contract in force. In such case, suspension may not
have the effect of extending the term of the contract initially
provided for.
(3) In case of lay-off and in the absence of a collective
agreement, the conditions for compensation shall be laid down by

[Page 17]
order of the Minister in charge of Labour, issued after
consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board.
Section 34 : (1) A contract of employment of unspecified
duration may be terminated at any time at the will of either
party. Such termination shall be subject to the condition that
previous notice is given by the party taking the initiative of
terminating the contract. Notification of termination shall be
made in writing to the other party and shall set out the reason for
the termination.
(2) The notice period shall start to run from the date of such
notification. It shall not be subject to any condition precedent or
condition subsequent. Under no circumstances may it be set off
against the leave period of the worker.
(3) An order of the Minister in charge of Labour, issued after
consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board, shall
prescribe the conditions for such notice and its duration, giving
regard to the worker's seniority in the enterprise and the
occupational group to which he belongs.
Section 35 : (1) During the period of notice, the employer and
the worker shall be bound to respect all the obligations which
each has assumed towards the other.
(2) For the purpose of seeking other employment, the worker
shall, during the period of notice, be allowed during each week
one day off (with full wages) which may be taken all at once or
one hour at a time as he may desire.
(3) Where the above obligations are not respected by one of the
parties, no period of notice shall be enforceable on the other
party. This provision shall be without prejudice to the right of the
injured party to claim damages.
Section 36 : (1) Whenever a contract of employment of
unspecified duration is terminated without notice or without the
full period of notice being observed, the responsible party shall
pay to the other party compensation corresponding to the
remuneration including any bonuses and allowances which the
worker would have received for the period of notice not observed.

[Page 18]
(2) Provided that a contract may be terminated without notice in
cases of serious misconduct, subject to the findings of the
competent court of law as regards the gravity of the misconduct.
Section 37 : (1) save in the case of serious misconduct, where a
contract of employment of unspecified duration is terminated by
the employer, the worker with no less than two successive years
of seniority in the enterprise shall be entitled to severance pay
distinct from pay in-lieu-of notice which shall be determined
giving regard to the worker's seniority.
(2) An order of the Minister in charge of Labour, issued after a
recommendation by the National Labour Advisory Board, shall
prescribe the conditions for granting and calculating the
severance pay.
Section 38 : A contract of employment of specified duration may
not be terminated prior to its expiry save in the case of gross
misconduct, force majeure, or by the written consent of both
parties.
Section 39 : (1) Every wrongful termination of a contrat may
entail damages. In particular dismissals effected because of the
opinions of the worker or his membership or non-membership of
a particular, trade union shall be considered to be wrongful.
(2) The competent court may ascertain the wrongful nature of the
termination by investigating the causes and circumstances
thereof. The judgment must expressly mention the reason put
forward by the party terminating the contract.
(3) In all cases of dismissal, it shall be up to the employer to
show that the grounds for dismissal alleged by him are well-
founded.
(4) Damages shall be assessed with due regard to all factors
indicating that prejudice has been caused and all factors
determining the extent of such prejudice, and in particular, with
due regard :
• (a) Where the worker is responsible, to his qualification and
post;

[Page 19]
• (b) Where the employer is responsible, for whatsoever the
type of employment, the worker's seniority with the
employer, his age and any vested rights.
However, the damages shall not be less than three months'
salary or more than one month's salary per year of service in the
enterprise.
(5) If the worker is rightfully dismissed by the employer without
respecting the formalities provided for, the amount of damages
shall not exceed one month's salary.
(6) The salary to be taken into consideration in above paragraphs
shall be the gross average monthly salary of the worker's last
twelve months of activity.
(7) These damages shall be distinct from pay in-lieu-of notice and
severance pay.
Section 40 : (1) The provisions of Section 34 (1) above shall be
applicable in the case of dismissal on economic grounds.
(2) Dismissal on economic grounds shall mean any dismissal
effected by the employer for one or more reasons not inherent in
the person of the worker and resulting from an abolition or
transformation of posts or an amendment to the contract of
employment consequent on economic difficulties, technological
changes or internal reorganization.
(3) To avoid dismissal on economic grounds, the employer who
envisages such dismissal shall convene the staff representatives,
where available, to seek with them and in the presence of the
Labour Inspector of the area, other possibilities such as :
reduction of working hours, shift work, part-time work, lay-off,
review of various allowances and benefits and even wage cuts.
(4) At the end of negotiations which shall not last more than 30
clear days, and if an agreement is reached, a statement shall be
signed by both parties and the Labour Inspector explaining the
measures adopted and their periods of validity.
(5) Where a worker states in writing that he does not accept the
measures referred to in the above paragraph, he shall be

[Page 20]
dismissed with pay in-lieu-of notice and severance pay, where he
meets the conditions for enjoyment thereof.
(6)
• (a) Where the parties fail to reach an agreement after the
negotiations provided for above, or where notwithstanding
the measures envisaged certain dismissals are still
necessary, the employer must determine an order of
dismissals taking into consideration professional proficiency,
seniority in the undertaking and the family responsibilities of
workers. In any case, the order of dismissals must give
precedence to professional proficiency.
• (b) To obtain the opinions and suggestions of the staff
representatives, the employers shall send them the list of
workers he intends the dismiss, explaining the criteria used.
• (c) The staff representatives shall be bound to forward their
written reply to the employer within no more than eight
clear days.
• (d) The employer's notification and the reply from the staff
representatives shall immediately be sent to the Labour
Inspector of the area for arbitration.
(7) Staff representatives may be dismissed only if their posts
have been abolished and with the consent of the Labour Inspector
of the area.
(8) In case of a dispute regarding the type or order of dismissals,
the onus of proof shall rest with the employer.
(9) A dismissed worker shall have prior claim, with equal
professional proficiency, to employment in the same
establishment for a period of two years.
(10) An order of the Minister in charge of Labour issued after
consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board shall
determine the terms and conditions of enforcement of the present
section.
Section 41 : In the event of termination of the contract subject
to the provisions of Section 27 (2) the employer shall be required
to so notify the authority which endorsed the contract within 15
days.

[Page 21]
Section 42 : (1)
• (a) In the event of any change in the legal statuts of the
employers, in particular through succession, sale,
amalgamation, financial reorganization, or transformation
into a partnership or company, all contracts of employment
in force on the date of the change shall subsist between the
new organization and the personnel of the undertaking.
They shall be terminable only in the manner and subject to
the conditions laid down in this Part.
• (b) The provisions of the above paragraph shall not be
applicable :
o - where the enterprise is changing its activities ;
o - where the workers express before the Labour
Inspector of the area, their desire to be laid off with
payment of their benefits, prior to such change.
• (c) The closure of the undertaking other than in cases of
"force majeure" shall not absolve the employer from his
obligation to observe the rules laid down in this part. Neither
bankruptcy nor liquidation by court order shall be deemed to
be a case of "force majeure".
(2) The contract of employment, may, while still in force, be
amended on the initiative of either party.
• (a) Where the amendment suggested by the employer is
substantial and is rejected by the worker, the termination of
the contract that may result therefrom shall be the
responsibility of the employer. Such termination shall be
wrongful only where it is not justified by the interest of the
undertaking.
• (b) Where the amendment suggested by the worker is
substantial and is rejected by the employer, the contract
may be terminated only following the resignation of the
worker.
Section 43 : Unless otherwise agreed, the provisions of Sections
34 to 42 shall not apply to probationary hiring contracts which
shall be terminable without notice and without either party having
a claim to compensation.
Section 44 : (1) On the expiry of the contract of employment,
regardless of the reason for its termination, the employer shall

[Page 22]
serve to the worker at the time of his departure a certificate
stating only the dates of his arrival and departure and the types
and dates of the various posts he has held.
(2) The said certificate shall be exempt from stamp duties and
registration fees, even if it contains the phrase "free of all
engagements" or other phrase not constituting a bond or a
receipt.

CHAPTER II - APPRENTICESHIP
Section 45 : A contract of apprenticeship is a contract whereby
the head of an industrial, commercial or agricultural
establishment of a craftsman undertakes to give or cause to be
given to another person complete and systematic training and
whereby the later under takes in return to obey the instructions
which he receives and to perform the tasks assigned to him for
the purpose of his apprenticeship.
Section 46 : Any such contract which is not made in writing shall
be null and void. Such contract shall be exempt from all stamp
duties and registration fees.
Section 47 : The conditions as to form and substance, the effect
of the contract, the circumstances and consequences of
termination and the measures of ensuring performance shall be
specified by a decree issued after consultation with the National
Labour Advisory Board.

CHAPTER III - SUBCONTRACTORS
Section 48 : A subcontractor shall be a person who enters into a
written contract with a contractor to carry out a specified piece of
work or supply specified services for an agreement price. The
subcontractor shall himself recruit the necessary workers.
Section 49 : (1) Where the work is carried out in the workshops
or other business premises of the contractor, he shall, where the
subcontractor becomes insolvent, assume the subcontractor's
obligations towards the workers.

[Page 23]
(2) Where the work is carried out a place other than the
workshop or other business premises of the contractors, he shall,
if the subcontractor becomes insolvent, be reponsible for
payment of the workers' wages.
(3) An aggrieved worker shall, in the above case, have the right
to institute direct action against the contractor.
(4) However, the provisions of Sub-sections (1), (2) and (3)
above shall not apply where the subcontractor is registered in the
trade register and holds a valid business licence.
Section 50 : (1) The subcontractor shall, in a notice permanently
displayed in all the workshops or other business premises where
work is being carried out, indicate that he is a subcontractor and
give his full name and address, the name and address of the
contractor who entrusted him with the work and the working
hours.
(2) The display of such notice shall be compulsory even if the
work is carried out in the workshops or other business premises
of the contractor.
Section 51 : A contractor shall keep an up-to-date list of the
subcontractors with whom he has signed contracts.

CHAPTER IV - COLLECTIVE AGREEMENTS AND COMPANY
AGREEMENTS
Section 52 : (1) A collective agreement is an agreement
intented to regulate labour relations between employers and
workers either of an enterprise or group of enterprises or of one
or more branches of activity. This agreement shall be concluded
between :
• - The representatives of one or more trade unions or a
federation of trade unions on the one hand ; and
• - The representatives of one or more employers'
associations or any other group of employers or one or more
employers acting individually on the other hand.

[Page 24]
(2) A collective agreement may contain more favourable to
workers than those of the law and regulations in force. It shall
not impair provisions relating to matters of public policy.
(3) Each collective agreement shall define its scope of application
which may be national, interdivisional or local.
(4) The text of every collective agreement shall be published free
of charge in the Official Gazette by the minister in-charge of
employment as soon as he has been notified that it has been
deposited at the registry of the competent court.
(5) Before such publication, the minister in charge of employment
may invite the contracting parties to amend or delete any
provisions of the said text which may be repugnant to existing
laws and regulations.
Section 53 : (1) At the request of one of the most representative
trade-unions or employers' associations or on the initiative of the
minister in-charge of employment, the provisions of a collective
agreement which complies with conditions laid down by
regulations may, by a decree issued after the National Labour
Advisory Board has given its reasoned opinion, be rendered
compulsory for all employers and workers within the industrial
and territorial coverage of the said agreement.
(2) Such extension of the rights and obligations provided under a
collective agreement shall apply for the period and on the
conditions laid down in the said agreement.
(3) However, the extension decree may, after the National Labour
Advisory Board has given its reasoned opinion and without
altering the general effect of the agreement, exclude from such
extension any clauses which are not in keeping with the
conditions of the particular branch of activity in the scope of the
agreement concerned.
Section 54 : (1) The extension decree shall cease to have effect
when the collective agreement of which it refers is no longer
enforceable between the parties as a result of its termination.
(2) At the requests of one of the signatory parties or on the
initiative of the minister in-charge of employment, such decrees

[Page 25]
may, after the National Labour Advisory Board has given its
reason opinion, be revoked so as to terminate the extension of
the collective agreement or any of its provisions whenever it
appears that the agreement or the provision in question is no
longer in keeping with the conditions of the branch of activity in
the territorial coverage concerned.
Section 55 : In case of the absence or inadequate organisation
of trade-unions or employers' associations resulting in the
continuing impossibility to conclude a collective agreement in a
given branch of activity or for a given occupation a decree issued
after consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board may
either regulate working conditions and determine the
classification of occupations and the minimum wage for that
branch or occupation or render wholly or partly applicable to it,
the provisions of a collective agreement in force in a branch of
activity within the same economic sector.
Section 56 : (1) Every decree to provide for or revoke the
extension of a collective agreement shall be preceded by
consultation with trade-unions and employers associations and
with all persons concerned who shall present their observations
within 30 (thirty) days.
(2) The terms and conditions of such consultation shall be laid
down by a decree issued the opinion of the National Labour
Advisory Board.
Section 57 : (1) Agreements concerning one or more specified
establishment may be made between an employer or group of
employers on the one hand, and representatives of the trade-
unions which are most representative of the personnel of the
establishment(s) concerned on the other hand.
(2) The object of company agreement shall be to adapt the
provisions of collective agreements to the particular conditions of
the establishment(s) under consideration, especially the
conditions of award and methods of calculation of the incentive
wage, individual or group production bonuses and productivity
bonuses.
(3) Company agreements may include new provisions and clauses
which are favorable to the workers.

[Page 26]
(4) In the absence of a collective agreement, a company
agreement may deal only with wages and subsidiary allowances.
Section 58 : Where the workers in any public or semipublic
enterprise or establishment are not subject to any special laws or
regulations, collective agreements may be concluded in their
regard in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
Section 59 : Wherever a collective agreement is extended by
decree, the said agreement shall apply to the public and semi-
public enterprises or establishments referred to in Section 58
above which, by reason of their nature and activity, fall within the
scope of the agreement.
Section 60 : Rules as to form and substance regarding the
conclusion and performance of the collective agreements and
company agreements shall be laid down by decree issued after
consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board.

PART IV - WAGES
CHAPTER I - DETERMINATION OF WAGES
Section 61: (1) In this law, "wages" means remuneration or
earnings, however designated or calculated, capable of being
evaluated in terms of money and fixed by mutual agreement or
by the provisions or regulations or collective agreements which
are payable by virtue of a contract or employment by an
employer to a worker for work done or to be done or for services
rendered or to be rendered.
(2) For the same type of work and level of proficiency, workers
shall be entitled to the same remuneration, irrespective of their
origin, sex, age, status and religion, subject to the provisions of
this section.
(3) Apart from the cases provided for by the regulations or
collective agreement in force and except where there is
agreement between the parties concerned, no wage shall be paid
to a worker in case of absence.

[Page 27]
Section 62 : (1) A decree issued after consultation with the
National Labour Advisory Board shall determine the guaranteed
minimum industrial and commercial wage.
(2) Occupational categories and wages applicable to such
categories shall be determined through negotiation within the
framework of the collective agreements or company agreements
provided for in Part III of this law.
Section 63 : The rates of remuneration for piecework shall be so
calculated that it provided a worker of average capacity, working
normally, with a wage at least equal to that of the worker
engaged in similar work and paid by unit of time.
Section 64 : The minimum wage rates and the conditions of
remuneration for piecework shall be posted up in the places
where workers are paid.
Section 65 : (1) When the remuneration of a worker's services
consists in whole or in part of commissions or sundry bonuses
and allowances or compensation in lieu of such allowances, such
remuneration, in so far as it does not constitute a refund of
expenses, shall be taken into a account in calculating
remuneration during paid holidays, pay in-lieu-of notice and
damages.
(2) The amount to be taken into consideration for this purpose
shall be the monthly average of the items referred to in sub-
section 1 above.
(3) The period in respect of which the calculation is made shall
not exceed the twelve months of service preceding the cessation
of work.
Section 66 : (1) An employer shall be bound to provide housing
for any worker he has transferred in order to perform a contract
of employment necessitating the installation of such worker
outside his normal place of residence. Such accommodation shall
be adequate and correspond to the family status of the worker,
and shall satisfy the conditions to be determined by order of the
minister in charge of Labour issued after consultation with the
National Labour Advisory Board.

[Page 28]
(2) If no housing is provided, the employer shall be bound to pay
the worker concerned a housing allowance. The minimum rate
and methods of payment shall be fixed by the above-mentioned
order.
(3) The employer shall be bound to ensure a regular supply of
foodstuffs for any worker and his family to whom he provided
accommodation where such a worker cannot produce such
foodstuffs himself. Such supply of foodstuffs shall be subject to
payment at a value to be determined by the order referred to
above.
(4) The facilities provided for in this section shall not be claimable
when wages are not due, except as may be provided in the
regulations in force, or stipulated by mutual agreement between
the parties cocerned.

CHAPTER II - PAYMENT OF WAGES
I - Mode of payment
Section 67 : Apart from the facilities provided for in Section 66
above, wages shall be payable in legal tender and any other
method of payment shall be unlawful. Any stipulation to the
contrary shall be null and void.
Section 68 : (1) Save in the case of trades and occupations
where the established custom is to provided for a different
frequency of payment, which trades and occupations shall be
specified by an order of the minister in charge of labour issued
after consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board, wages
shall be paid at regular intervals not exceeding one month.
However, workers may, at their request, receive at the end of
fifteen days a payment on account equal to half the monthly
amount of their basic remuneration and in such case the balance
due to them shall be settled at the time of the following payment.
(2) Monthly payments shall be made not later than eight days
following the end of the month of employment in respect of which
the wages are dues.

[Page 29]
(3) Upon the termination of the contract of employment, a final
settlement of all wages and allowances shall be effected as soon
as the employment ceases.
However, in disputed cases the employer may obtain
authorization form the President of the competent court to retain
provisionally all or part or any attachable portion of the amount
payable.
(4) Workers absent on pay day shall be entitled to draw their
wages during the normal hours of opening of the pay office in
accordance with the the internal regulations of the enterprise.
(5) Wages shall be paid on working days only at or near the
work-place. Wages may not be paid in a public house or in a shop
or store except in the case of workers who are normally employed
there.
Section 69 : (1) Payment of wages shall be evidenced by a
document made out or certified by the employer or his
representative and initialled by each worker or by by two
witnesses if the worker can neither read not write English or
French . These documents shall be preserved by the employer in
the same manner as accounting documents and shall be made
available, upon demand, to Inspectorate of Labour.
(2) The employer shall, at the time of payment, give the worker
an individual pay voucher in the form prescribed by order of the
minister in charge of labour issued after consultation with the
National Labour Advisory Board.
(3) The fact that a worker has signed and entry of the words "in
full settlement" or any similar expression either during the
performance of his contract of employment or after termination
whereby he purports the waive all or part of his rights under the
contract of employment shall not be admitted as evidence of
satisfaction.
(4) Acceptance of the pay voucher by the worker without protest
or reservation shall not be considered as a remuneration by him
of payment of all or any part of any wages, allowances or
supplementary payments which are due him by virtue of laws,
regulations, agreements or contractual provisions. Such

[Page 30]
acceptance shall not suspend the barring of an action of recovery
as laid down in Section 74, nor shall it prevent review of the
worker's wage account.
II - Privileges and guarantees of wage claims
Section 70 : (1) Up to the limit of the percentage of wages not
liable to attachment as provided for by the laws and regulations
in force wage claims shall be preferred claims having priority over
all other general or special or preferential claims.
(2) The priority of claims shall extend to compensation due for
breach of contract and to the damages referred to in Section 39.
Section 71: Special laws affording direct action or special
preferential claims to certain categories of workers shall apply to
wage claims.
Section 72 : In the event of liquidation or bankruptcy, the sums
withheld by the Treasury, after cessation of payments, from
payment warrants due to the employer shall be paid into the
assets.
Section 73 : (1) In the same event, a worker housed in
accommodation provided by the employer before commencement
of liquidation or bankruptcy proceedings shall be entitled to it
under Section 66.
(2) Such a worker shall be granted legal aid, without other
conditions, as regards any application for an attachment order
which he may think fit to make to the competent court.
III - Limitation of action of recovery of wages
Section 74 : (1) Action for the recovery of wages shall be barred
by limitation after three years. As regards limitation, any
compensation due for breach of contract of employment shall be
deemed to be wages.
(2) Limitation shall start to run from the date on which wages fall
due. It shall cease to run either in case of a written claim by the
worker to the Inspector of Labour concerning payment of wages
or in case of making up of account, private acknowledgment of

[Page 31]
debt, authentic deed of acknowledgement of debt or unexpired
summons.

CHAPTER III - DEDUCTIONS FROM WAGES
Section 75 : (1) Apart from compulsory levies, reimbursement
of the value of any facilities provided in conformity with the
provisions of Section 66 (3) and any deposits which may be
stipulated in collective agreements or individual contracts, no
deductions from wages shall be permissible save in the following
circumstances :
• (a) Where there is a court order of attachment;
• (b) in application of the provisions of Section 21 of this law ;
• (c) by voluntary assignment to which the worker has
subscribed in person and notified for verification to the
Inspector of Labour of his place of residence in the case of
repayment of cash advances made by the employer to the
worker, and before the president of the competent court in
other cases ;
• (d) where a friendly society providing for payment of
contributions by the workers has been instituted within the
framework of the laws and regulations in force.
(2) Payment on account in relation to work in progress shall not
be considered as advances.
(3) Any stipulation in a collective agreement or individual contract
authorizing other levies shall be null and void.
(4) Any sum withheld from a worker in violation of the above
provisions shall bear interest payable to him at the statutory rate
from the date at which it should have been paid and may be
claimed by him until the right is barred by limitation ; effluxion of
the limitation period shall be suspended during currency of the
contract of employment.
Section 76 : (1) A decree issued after consultation with the
National Labour advisory Board shall determine the portions of
wages which may be liable to progressive levies and the rates of
such levies. Deductions made under the preceding section shall

[Page 32]
determine the portions of wages which may be liable to
progressive levies and the rates of such levies. Deductions made
under the preceding section shall not exceed, at each wage
payment, the percentage established by this decree.
(2) In the calculation of deductions, regard shall be had not only
to the wages proper but also to all payments supplementary
thereto, excepting the allowances specified as unattachable by
the rules and regulations in force, sums payable by way of
reimbursement of expenses incurred by the worker and any
benefits due under the social insurance legislation or regulations
issued thereunder.
Section 77 : It shall be unlawfull for employers to restrict in any
way a worker's freedom to dispose of his wages as he thinks fit.

CHAPTER IV - COMPANY STORES
Section 78 : (1) The term "company store" means any
arrangement whereby an employers directly or undirectly sells or
supplied goods the workers in his employment for their normal
personal requirements.
(2) A company store shall be permitted to operate provided that
the following four conditions are met;
• (a) the workers are free to obtain their supplies there or
not.
• (b) the goods are sold for immediate cash payment and
without profit;
• (c) the accounts of the company store or stores are kept
entirely separate and are subject to inspection by a
supervisory committee elected by the workers ; and
• (d) neither alcohol nor spirituous liquors are offered for sale.
Section 79 : (1) The opening of a company store as provided for
in Section 78 shall be subject to a declaration lodged with the
local Inspector of Labour.
(2) The operation of any company store shall be subject to
inspection by the Inspector of Labour who may, on discovery of

[Page 33]
any abuse, order the closing of the store for a period not
exceeding one month.
In the event of a second offence, the store shall be permanently
closed by order of the minister in charge of labour on the
proposal of the local Inspector of Labour.

PART V - CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
CHAPTER I - HOURS OF WORK
Section 80 : (1) Statutory hours of work in all public and private
non-agricultural establishments may not exceed forty hours per
week.
(2) In all agricultural and allied undertakings, the hours of work
shall be based on a total of two thousand four hundred hours per
year, within the maximum limits of forty-eight hours per week.
(3) The above provisions shall apply to all workers, irrespective of
age and sex and irrespective of the mode of payment.
(4) Decrees issued after consultation with the National Labour
Advisory Board shall determine the circumstances under which
exemptions from compliance with the statutory hours of work are
authorized, as well as the conditions governing the performance
and remuneration of overtime giving rise to extra pay.

CHAPTER II - NIGHT WORK
Section 81 : Any work done between ten p.m. and six a.m. shall
be considered as night work.
Section 82 : (1) the rest period for women and children shall be
not less than 12 (twelve) consecutive hours.
(2) Night work in industries shall be prohibited for women and
children.
(3) This prohibition shall not apply to :

[Page 34]
• (a) women with executive duties ;
• (b) women working in services not involving manual labour.
(4) The procedure for implementing this section shall determined
by order of the minister in charge of labour, issued after
consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board.

CHAPTER III - EMPLOYMENT OF WOMEN, YOUNG PERSONS
AND CHILDREN
Section 83 : An order by the Minister in charge of labour, issued
after consultation with the National Commission on Industrial
Hygiene and safety provided for under Section 120, shall specify
the types of tasks which women and pregnant women
respectively shall not perform.
Section 84 : (1) Any pregnant woman whose pregnancy has
been medically certified may terminate her contract of
employment without notice and without being obliged on that
account to pay the compensation provided for in Section 36
above. During such period, the employer shall not terminate the
employment contract of the woman concerned because of the
pregnancy.
(2) Every pregnant woman shall be entitled to 14 (fourteen)
weeks of maternity leave starting 4 (four) weeks before the due
date of confinement. Such leave may be extended by 6 (six)
weeks in case of a dully certified illness resulting either from the
pregnancy or confinement. During such leave, the employer shall
not terminate the employment contract of the woman in question.
(3) Where the confinement occurs before the due date, the rest
period shall be extended so that the worker receives the full 14
(fourteen) weeks of leave to which she is entitled.
(4) Where the confinement occurs after the due date, leave taken
before may be extended to the date of confinement without such
extension leading to the reduction of the postnatal leave.
(5) Apart from the various benefits provided for by legislation in
matter of social and family welfare, the woman shall be entitled,

[Page 35]
during the maternity leave, to a daily allowance, payable by the
National Social Insurance Fund and equal to the amount of the
wages, actually received at the time of suspension of the
employment contract ; she shall retain the right to benefits in
kind.
Section 85 : (1) For a period of 15 (fifteen) months following the
birth of the child the mother shall be entitled to nursing breaks.
(2) The total duration of the breaks shall not exceed 1 (one) hour
per working day.
(3) During the said period, the mother may terminate her
contract of employment without notice under the conditions laid
down under Section 84 (1) above.
Section 86 : (1) No child shall employed in an enterprise even as
an apprentice before the age of 14 (fourteen) years, except as
otherwise authorized by order of the minister in charge of labour,
taking account of local conditions and the jobs which the children
may be asked to do.
(2) An order of the minister in charge of labour shall determine
the conditions for the hiring, employment and supervision of the
employment of young persons on board ship, provided :
• (a) that a young person under 18 (eighteen) years of age
may in no case be employed on board ship as a trimmer or
stocker, and
• (b) that when children and young persons under 18
(eighteen) years of age are to be embarked on ships other
than those on which only members of the same family are
employed, they shall be medically examined to ascertain
their fitness for work on board ship and a medical certificate
shall be made out attesting fitness for such work and signed
by an approved medical practitioner.
(3) An order of the minister in charge of labour shall specify the
types of work and categories of enterprises in which young people
shall not be employed, and the age-limit to which the prohibition
shall apply.

[Page 36]
(4) The orders referred to in the above sub-sections shall be
issued after consultation with the National Commission on
Industrial Hygiene and Safety.
Section 87 : (1) The Inspector of Labour of the area may order
women and children to be examined by an approved medical
practitioner in order to ascertain that the work allotted to them in
not beyond their strength. Such order shall be automatic if
requested by the woman or child.
(2) A woman or child shall not be kept on any job which has been
so found to be beyond their strength and shall be transferred to
more suitable work. If this is impossible, the contract shall be
terminated without notice and without either party being
responsible.

CHAPTER IV - WEEKLY REST
Section 88 : Weekly rest shall be compulsory. It shall consist of
at least 24 (twenty-four) consecutive hours each week. Such rest
shall fall as a rule on Sundays and may under no circumstances
be replaced by a compensatory allowance.
(2) An order by the minister in charge of labour, issued after
consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board, shall
prescribe the procedure for applying the preceding sub-section.

CHAPTER V - LEAVE AND TRANSPORT
I- Leave
Section 89 : (1) In the absence of more favourable in the
collective agreement or individual employment contract, paid
leave at the employer's expense shall accrue to the worker at the
rate of one and a half working days for each month of actual
service.
(2) Any period equivalent to 4 (four) weeks or 24 (twenty-four)
days of work shall be deemed to be 1 (one) month of effective
service.

[Page 37]
(3) For the calculation of leave, periods of effective service shall
be :
• (a) Periods of unavailability due to industrial accident or
occupational disease;
• (b) Absences, not exceeding 6 (six) months, stemming from
illness duly certified as provided for under Section 32 above
:
• (c) Maternity leave provided for under Section 84 above;
• (d) Lay-offs as provided for under Section 32 above.
(4) A maximum of 10 (ten) days per year of paid special leave of
absence, not deductible from annual leave, shall be granted to
workers on the occasion of family events directly concerning their
own home. A decree issued after consultation with the National
Labour Advisory Board shall determine the procedure for
implementing this sub-section.
Section 90 : (1) For young persons under 18 (eighteen) years of
age, leave shall accrue at the rate of two and a half days instead
of one and a half days per months of service.
(2) For mothers, the leave shall be increased by either 2 (two)
working days for each child under 6 (six) years of age on the date
of the departure on leave who is officially registered and lives in
the home, or 1 (one) day only if the mother's accrued leave does
not exceed 6 (six) days.
(3) The leave shall be increased depending on the workers length
of service in the enterprise by 2 (two) working days for each full
period whether continuous or not of 5 (five) years of service. For
mothers, this increase shall be additional to the one provided for
under the sub-section above.
(4) Leave which exceeds 12 (twelve) working days may be split
up by mutual consent of the parties. In this case, on of the
portions of leave must be at last 12 (twelve) continuous working
days.
Section 91 : (1) Unpaid leave, whose duration shall not be
deducted from the annual paid leave, may be granted, at his
request, to a worker or apprentice who wishes to attend a course
exclusively devoted to workers' education or trade union training

[Page 38]
and organized either by a centre attached to a worker's trade
union organization recognized as representative at the national
level or by an organization, institution or agency specially
approved to this effect by the Minister in charge of Labour.
(2) The duration of the said leave which may be split up shall be
agreed upon by both parties. The leave, which shall not exceed
18 (eighteen) working days, shall be deemed to be a period of
actual service for the calculation of the worker's paid leave,
family allowances and length of service in the enterprise.
Section 92 : (1) Leave shall have accrued after a period of
actual service of 1 (one) year.
(2) Provided that collective agreement or individual contracts
providing for leave longer than that determined by section 89
may stipulate that the leave shall have accrued after a longer
period of actual service, but such period may not exceed 2 (two)
years.
(3) Entitlement to leave shall be barred by limitation 3 (three)
years after the day on which employment is terminated.
(4) If the contract is terminated or expires before the worker has
exercised his right to leave, he shall receive compensation in lieu
thereof, based on the entitlement which has accrued under
Section 89 and 90 above.
(5) Since leave is granted to the worker so that he may be able
to rest, payment of compensation in lieu of leave shall be
prohibited in all other cases.
Section 93 : The employer shall pay the worker, not later than
the last day preceding the date of departure on leave, an
allowance which shall be determined in a manner laid down by
decree, issued after consultation with the National Labour
Advisory Board.
II - Transport
Section 94 : (1) Where, because, of the employer, performance
of the employment contract requires or has required a worker to
move from his usual residence, the employer shall be responsible

[Page 39]
for the travelling expenses of the worker, his spouse and minor
children normally residing with him, as well as for the transport of
their luggage.
(2) Travel and transport expenses are allowances in kind and
shall therefore be provided only in case of actual travel by the
worker and his family.
(3) The conditions of implementing the above provisions shall be
determined by decree issued after consultation with the National
Labour Advisory Board.
(4) A worker who has terminated his service and is waiting for
the means of transport selected by the employer in order to
return to his usual residence shall retain the right to benefits in
kind and shall receive from the employer an retain the right to
benefits in kind and shall receive from the employer an allowance
equal to the remuneration which he would have received, had he
continued to work.
(5) Entitlement to travel and transport expenses shall be barred
by limitation 3 (three) years after the day on which employment
is terminated.

PART VI - SAFETY AND HYGIENE AT THE WORKPLACE
CHAPTER I - SAFETY
Section 95 : (1) Hygiene and safety conditions at the workplace
shall be determined by orders of the Minister in charge of labour,
issued after consultation with the National Commission on
Industrial Hygiene and Safety.
(2) The said orders, while taking local conditions and
contingencies into account, shall aim at securing for the workers
standards of hygiene and safety conforming with those
recommended by the international Labour Organization and other
Internationally recognized technical bodies.
(3) They shall specify the cases and circumstances in which
Labour Inspectors or the occupational Health Doctors shall have
recourse to the procedure of serving formal notice on the

[Page 40]
employer. However, where there is an impending threat to the
health and safety of workers, the Labour Inspector or the
occupational Health Doctor shall order immediately enforceable
measures to be taken.
Section 96 : (1) Where working conditions endangering the
safety or health of the workers but not covered by orders referred
to in Section 95 are found to exist, the Labour Inspector or the
occupational Heath Doctor shall request the employer to remedy
the situation. If the employer objects, the dispute shall be
referred to the National Commission on Industrial Hygiene and
Safety which shall give a ruling.
(2) In all cases, the Labour Inspector or the Occupational Health
Doctor shall report to the said Commission on working conditions
which are deemed to be dangerous, in order that appropriate
regulations may, if necessary, be prepared.
Section 97 : (1) It shall be forbidden to bring alcoholic
beverages to the workplace and to consume them within the
establishment during working hours.
(2) Consumption of such beverages within the establishment may
be authorized only during normal break periods and exclusively
within the canteens and recfectories placed at the disposal of
workers by the employer.
(3) The employer shall supply water and non-alcoholic beverages
at the workplace and during working hours. Such beverages shall
be controlled occasionally by the Labour Inspector or the
Occupational Health Doctor.
(4) The procedure for implementing the above measures shall be
determined, where necessary, by orders of the minister in charge
of labour, issued after consultation with the National Commission
for Industrial Hygiene and Safety.

CHAPTER II - HEALTH SERVICES
Section 98 : (1) Every enterprise and establishment of any kind,
public or private, lay or religious, civilian or military, including

[Page 41]
those where persons are employed in connection with work in the
professions and those belonging to trade unions or professional
associations, shall provide medical and health services for their
employees.
(2) The functions of such services shall be to supervise conditions
in respect of hygiene in the establishment, the risks of contagion
and the state of health of the workers, and of their spouses and
children if housed by the employer as well as to take the
appropriate preventive measures and provide the necessary
medical care in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) The conditions under which workers and their families may
benefits from health coverage shall be laid down by order of the
minister in charge of labour, issued after consultation with the
National Commission for Industrial Hygiene and Safety.
Section 99 : (1) The medical and health service shall be under
the responsibility of medical doctors who shall be recruited
preferably from among practitioners holding diplomas in industrial
medicine and who shall be assisted by qualified paramedical
personnel.
(2) All persons so employed shall have been previously approved
by a decision of the minister in charge of labour issued after
consultation with the Minister of Public Health, in case of
paramedical personnel, consultation with the medical association,
in case of doctors. Approval requirements shall be fixed by joint
order of the minister in charge of labour and the minister in
charge of public health.
(3) According to the size and nature of the establishment, its
location and the medical infrastructure available, the medical and
health service shall be organized :
• (a) Either in the form of a separate service within the
establishment concerned, or in the form of a joint service for
several establishments ;
• (b) Or on the basis of an agreement made with a public or
private hospital.
(4) The procedure for the setting up, organization and functioning
of medical and health services as well as the number and the

[Page 42]
qualifications of the medical and paramedical personnel to be
employed in each establishment, having regard to local conditions
and to the number of workers and of workers' dependents, shall
be determined by order of the Minister in charge of Labour issued
after consultation with the National Commission for Industrial
Hygiene and Safety.
Section 100 : (1) Without prejudice to the special measures
taken for purposes of hygiene and for the prevention of certain
occupational diseases or the protection of certain categories of
workers, all workers shall undergo a medical examination prior to
engagement.
(2) Workers shall also be subject to medical supervision
throughout their career.
(3) Orders by the Minister in charge of Labour issued after
consultation with the National Commission for Industrial health
and Safety shall determine the procedure regarding the medical
examinations to be performed before and after engagement.
Section 101 : (1) Where a worker or workers' spouse(s) or child
(children) housed by the employer under the conditions stipulated
in Article 66 above falls ill, the employer shall provide medical
care and the necessary medicaments and accessories, within the
pecuniary limits determined by order of the Minister in charge of
Labour issued after consultation with the National Commission for
Industrial Hygiene and Safety.
(2) The employer shall also be required to provide board for
every sick worker detained in the infirmary at his establishment.
Section 102 : (1) The employer shall arrange for the removal to
the nearest medical unit of any sick or injured person fit to be
moved who cannot be treated with the facilities at the employer's
disposal.
(2) If the employer has not suitable transport immediately
available for the above purpose, he shall without loss of time the
head of the nearest administrative unit, who shall cause the
patient to be removed by transport at his disposal.

[Page 43]
(3) Where the sick or injured persons are not fit be moved, the
administrative authority notified by the employer shall arrange for
medical care to be provided on the spot.
(4) All costs incurred by the Administration in this connection
shall be repaid by the employer at the official rates.
Section 103 : An order of the minister in charge of labour,
issued after consultation with the National Commission for
Industrial Hygiene and Safety, shall determine the circumstances
in which employers are required to set up medical services, and
to provide these with medicaments and accessories.

PART VII - ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES AND MEASURES OF
IMPLEMENTATION
CHAPTER I - LABOUR AND SOCIAL INSURANCE
ADMINISTRATION
Section 104 : (1) The Labour and Social Insurance
Administration comprises all services responsible for matters
relating to the condition of workers, labour relations employment,
manpower, movements, vocational guidance and training,
placement, the protection of wokers' health as well as social
insurance problems.
(2) A decree shall determine the organization and functioning of
such services.
I - Duties and Prerogatives of Labour and Social Insurance
Inspectors
Section 105 : (1) By "Labour and Social Insurance Inspector",
referred to in this law as a "Labour Inspector", we mean any civil
servant of the labour administration corps placed at the head of a
labour and social insurance inspectorate or his delegate.
(2) Labour Inspectors shall be civil servants enjoying job security
virtue of their status and conditions of service.

[Page 44]
(3) In order that their independence may be ensured, the said
inspectors shall have no interest whatsoever in the enterprises
under their supervision.
Section 106 : (1) The Labour Inspectors shall swear to carry out
their duties well and faithfully and not to reveal, even after
leaving the service, any manufacturing secrets or other processes
with which they may have become acquainted in the course of
their duties.
(2) The oath shall be taken once only before the court of appeal
of the area of their first posting.
(3) Every violation of the oath shall be subject to penalties.
(4) The Labour Inspectors shall treat as absolutely confidential
the source of any complaint bringing to their notice a defect in
the installation or a breach of legal and statutory provisions and
shall give no intimation to the employer or his representative that
a particular inspection was made in consequence of a complaint.
Section 107 : (1) Labour Inspectors who are heads of
Inspectorates shall have the initiative with respect to their tours
of inspection and inquiries within the framework of labour
legislation and regulations in force.
(2) They shall have permanently at their disposal the human and
material resources necessary for performance of their duties.
Section 108 : (1) Labour Inspectors with the proper credentials
shall be empowered :
• - to enter any establishment liable to inspection, freely and
without warning at any time of the day or night, for the
purpose of inspection ;
• - to enter for the purpose of inspection any infirmary of an
establishment or any canteen, sanitary installation or any
facility supplying workers with water.
• - to carry out any examination, control or inquiry which they
consider necessary to ascertain that the laws regulations in
force are strictly complied with and, in particular:
• - to interrogate, alone or in the present of witnesses, the
employer or the staff of the enterprise on any matters

[Page 45]
concerning the application of the laws and regulations in
force ;
• - to ask for any books, registers and documents the keeping
of which is prescribed by laws or regulations relating to
conditions of employment, in order to ensure that they
conform with the laws and regulations in force and to copy
such documents or make extracts from them;
• - to enforce the posting of notices where this is required by
the laws and regulations in force ;
• - to take and carry away for purposes of analysis samples of
materials and substances used or handled, subject to the
employer or his representative being notified of any samples
taken and carried away for such purpose.
(2) Labour Inspectors shall notify the employer or his
representative of any inspection visit unless they consider that
such notification may be prejudicial to the effectiveness of the
inspection.
Section 109 : (1) Labour Inspectors may record in official
reports having the force of prima facie evidence, any
infringement of labour laws and regulations.
They shall be empowered to take direct legal action before the
competent court against any persons infringing the provisions of
this law and its implementation instruments ;
(2) The terms and conditions under which Labour Inspectors shall
exercise their powers of control shall, as and when necessary, be
laid down by regulations.
Section 110 : (1) In military establishments employing civilian
labour, the powers and responsibilities of inspectors concerning
the monitoring of the application of labour laws and regulations
may be conferred upon officials or officers specially appointed for
that purpose whenever the interests of national defence preclude
the admittance of personnel not belonging the the establishments
concerned.
(2) Such appointments shall be made by the President of the
Republic on the joint proposal of the minister in charge of defence
and the minister in charge of labour.

[Page 46]
(3) In any case, persons exercising such monitoring functions
shall immediately inform the local labour inspector of any action
taken by them.
Section 111 : For execution of the duties entrusted to the
Labour Medical Inspectorate, the medical inspectors of labour
shall have the same obligations rights and prerogatives as those
conferred on Labour Inspectors by Section 106, 107, 108 and 109
of this law.
II - Placement
Section 112 : (1) Placement shall come under the jurisdiction of
the minister in charge of labour.
(2) Placement operations shall be carried out free of charge for
workers either by :
• (a) government services or bodies ;
• (b) offices or agencies opened by trade unions, employers'
associations or private bodies.
(3) The opening of the offices or agencies referred to in Sub-
section 2(b) above shall be subject to the prior approval of the
minister in charge of labour.
(4) A decree issued after consultation with the National Labour
Advisory Board shall determine the conditions for the
implementation of this section.
Section 113 : In order to ensure full employment of national
labour force, decrees issued after consultation with the National
Labour Advisory Board shall limit the employment of workers of
foreign nationality in certain occupations or at certain levels of
professional qualifications.

CHAPTER II - MEASURES OF CONTROL
Section 114 : (1) Every person who opens or re-opens an
enterprise or establishment of any king shall submit a declaration
thereof to the local labour inspectorate. The same rule shall apply
in case of charge or discontinuance of business or transfer.

[Page 47]
(2) An order of the minister in charge of Labour issued after
consultation with the National Labour Advisory Board shall lay
down the conditions under which such declarations shall be made.
Section 115 : Every employer, whether public or private and
irrespective of the nature of this activity, shall furnish the local
labour inspectorate and the services in charge of employment
with detailed information concerning the situation of the
manpower employed by him. Such information shall be in the
form of a declaration, the frequency and conditions of submission
of which shall be determined by order of the minister in charge of
labour issued after consultation with the National Labour Advisory
Board.
Section 116 : (1) The employer shall maintain at the workplace
and keep constantly up to date a register called the "employer's
register" which shall record such information as will enable the
labour and social insurance services to exercise control over the
minister in charge of labour.
(2) An order issued after consultation with the National Labour
Advisory Board shall determine the form of the register, the
information which it must contain and the manner in which it
shall be kept at the disposal of control officials.
(3) The said order shall also prescribe the conditions under which
certain enterprises or categories of enterprises may be exempted
from keeping an employers' register.

PART VIII - PROFESSIONAL INSTITUTIONS
CHAPTER I - THE NATIONAL LABOUR ADVISORY BOARD
Section 117 : (1) A National Labour Advisory Board, hereinafter
referred to as the "Board", shall be established under the ministry
in charge of labour.
(2) Its functions shall be :
• (a) to examine matters relating to working conditions,
employment, vocational guidance and training, placement,
manpower movements, migration, improvement of the

[Page 48]
material conditions of workers, social insurance, trade
unions and employers' associations ;
• (b) to make the recommendations and proposals relating to
laws and regulations to be made in the above areas, where
such recommendations are provided for by this law.
Section 118 : (1) There shall be established within the National
Labour Advisory Board and Standing Committee to which the
Board may delegate powers to make any recommendations and
proposals and examine and study all matters falling within its
province.
(2) Ad-hoc committees may, as and when necessary, be formed
within the board.
Section 119 : (1) The National Labour Advisory Board shall be
presided over by the minister in charge of labour or his
representative. It shall comprise :
• (a) one substantive member and one alternate member
representing the National Assembly;
• (b) one substantive member and one alternate member
representing the Economic and Social Council;
• (c) one substantive member and one alternate member
representing the Supreme Court ;
• (d) an equal number of substantive and alternate
representative of workers and employers appointed by an
order of the minister in charge of labour on the proposal of
the most representative workers' and employers'
organizations ;
• (e) Where appropriate, experts and techniciens sitting in an
advisory capacity and appointed by an order of the minister
in charge of labour in the light of the agenda of each
session.
(2) The organization and functioning of the National Labour
Advisory Board as well as of its Standing and Ad-hoc Committees
shall be determined by regulations.

CHAPTER II - THE NATIONAL COMMISSION ON
INDUSTRIAL HEALTH AND SAFETY

[Page 49]
Section 120 : (1) A National Commission on Industrial Health
and Safety shall be set up under the ministry in charge of labour.
(2) It shall be charged with the study of problems related to
industrial medicine and the hygiene and safety of workers. In this
capacity, it shall be responsible for;
• (a) making suggestions and recommendations concerning
laws and regulations to be made in the above fields ;
• (b) making recommendations for the benefit of employers
and workers, insurance bodies and various ministries
concerning the protection of the health of workers;
• (c) making proposals concerning the approval of dangerous
machinery and manufacturing processes likely to endanger
the health of workers ;
• (d) carrying out or participating in any work of a scientific
nature falling within its sphere of activity.
Section 121 : (1) The National Commission on Industrial Health
and Safety shall be presided over by the minister in charge of
labour or his representative. It shall comprise technicians or
experts of unquestionable competence in the fields of industrial
medicine and industrial hygiene and safety. Representatives of
workers and employers shall be represented in equal number
within the National Commission.
(2) The National Commission may seek the assistance of experts
whenever it deems this necessary.
(3) The organization and functioning of the National Commission
shall be determined by regulations.

CHAPTER III - STAFF REPRESENTATIVES
Section 122 : (1) Staff representatives shall be elected in any
establishment located within the national territory, employing, on
a regular basis, at least twenty workers governed by this law,
irrespective of the nature of the establishment or of the
employer, be he public or private, lay or religious, civilian or
military.

[Page 50]
(2) Where the head of the establishment has the status of worker
he shall be part of the labour force to be considered for election.
(3) Staff representatives shall be elected for a two-year term of
office. They shall be eligible for re-election.
Section 123 : (1) With the exception of the head of the
establishment, workers of either sex who are eighteen years old
and have worked for not less than six months in the enterprise
shall qualify as electors.
(2) Electors, who are aged twenty years, can express themselves
in English and French and have worked continuously in the
enterprise for not less than twelve months shall be eligible for
election.
(3) The head of the establishment, his spouse, ascendants as well
as his relatives of the same degree shall not be eligible for
election.
Section 124 : (1) Save in exceptional circumstances or unless
otherwise provided for by agreement, the head of an
establishment shall be bound to allow staff representatives a
period of time of not more than 15 (fifteen) hours per month to
perform their duties.
Such time shall be considered and paid for as working time. It
shall be used only for the performance of duties that pertain to
the office of staff representative such as are defined by the laws
and regulations in force.
Where the time is not used, it may neither be carried forward to
the following month nor be paid for.
Section 125 : An order of the minister in charge of labour issued
after consultation with the National Advisory Board shall
determine :
• (a) the number of staff representatives to be elected and
their division into electoral colleges ;
• (b) the procedure of election which shall be by secret ballot;

[Page 51]
• (c) the form of the report on the election which the
employer shall be bound to submit to the Labour Inspector
of the area.
• (d) the conditions under which the staff representatives
shall be received by their employer or his representative as
well as the facilities to be made available to them;
• (e) the conditions whereby a staff representative may be
removed by the electoral college that elected him.
Section 126 : (1) Objections regarding electors, eligibility of
staff representatives or the regularity of elections shall be dealt
with by the Court of First Instance of the area which shall give a
ruling without delay.
(2) To be admissible, an objection must be lodged within 3
(three) days following publication of the electoral lists if it relates
to electors or to eligibility, within the 15 (fifteen) days following
the announcement of the results of the election if it relates to the
regularity thereof.
Section 127 : Each staff representative shall have a substitute
elected in like manner who shall replace him when he is absent
for any valid reason, or in the event of his death, resignation,
removal, change of occupational category resulting in a change of
electoral college, termination of contract of employment or loss of
the qualifications for eligibility.
Section 128 : The functions of the staff representatives shall be
:
• (a) to refer to the employers any individual or collective
demands in respect of conditions of employment, workers'
protection, the application of collective agreements,
classification of occupations and wage rates which have not
been directly acceeded to ;
• (b) to refer to the Labour Inspectorate any complaint or
claim in respect of the application of the laws and
regulations which the said inspectorate is responsible for
enforcing;
• (c) to ensure that the rules relating to the hygiene and
safety of workers and to social insurance are observed, and
to recommend any necessary action in these matters ;

[Page 52]
• (d) to submit to the employer any useful suggestions for
improving the organization and output of the enterprise.
Section 129 : Notwithstanding the above provisions, the workers
shall be entitled to submit their grievances and suggestions
personally to the employer.
Section 130 : (1) An employer or his representative proposing
to terminate the appointment of a staff representative, whether
permanent of substitute, shall be bound to seek and obtain the
prior authorization of the local Labour Inspector.
(2) The Labour Inspector shall, after hearing both parties, ensure
that the propose determination is not motivated by acts carried
out by the staff representative while performing his duties.
(3) Any dismissal made in violation of the foregoing provisions
shall be null and void.
(4) However, in cases of serious misconduct, the employer may
temporarily suspend the staff representative, pending the
decision of the Labour Inspector. If the authorization is not
granted, the staff representative shall be reinstated with full pay
for the period of the suspension.
(5) The Labour Inspector shall make his decision known within a
time limit of 1 (one) month, after which the authorization shall be
taken for granted unless the Labour Inspector has notified the
employer that an additional month is necessary for him to
complete his enquiry.
(6) The above provisions shall apply to :
• (a) staff representatives who have been proposed for
transfer elsewhere, thus making it impossible for them to
perform their duties in their original establishment, unless
the persons concerned have given their consent before the
local Labour Inspector ;
• (b) former staff representatives for a period of 6 (six)
months flowing the expiry of their term of office ;
• (c) candidates for the office of Staff Representative for a
period of 6 (six) months following the date of filing of
nomination papers.

[Page 53]
(7) Notwithstanding the authorization of the Labour Inspector to
dismiss a Staff Representative, such Staff Representative
reserves the right to bring the matter before the competent court
in accordance with the procedure laid down in Section 139 of this
law.

PART IX - LABOUR DISPUTES
CHAPTER I - INDIVIDUAL DISPUTES
Section 131 : Any individual dispute arising from a contract of
employment between workers and their employers or from a
contract of apprenticeship shall fall within the jurisdiction of the
court dealing with the labour disputes in accordance with the
legislation on judicial organization.
Section 132 : The competent court shall, in pinciple, be that of
the place of employment ; provided that a worker who no longer
resides at the place where he was performing a contract of
employment or before that of this place of residence, on condition
that both courts are situated in Cameroon.
I - Court
Section 133 : (1) The court dealing with labour disputes shall be
composed of:
• (a) a president who shall be a judicial officer ;
• (b) an employer assessor and a worker assessor chosen
from the lists drawn up in accordance with Section 134
below;
• (c) a registrar.
(2) The president shall designate the assessors who are to sit for
each case.
(3) Where one or both of assessors duly summoned to attend fail
to do so, the president shall summon them again. In the event
where one or both of the assessors still fail to attend, the
president shall sit alone.

[Page 54]
(4) In the case referred to in the foregoing subsection, the
judgment shall make mention of the duly justified absence of one
or both of the assessors.
(5) Except in a case of force majeure, any assessor who is absent
three times during his term of office shall be relieved of his
duties. Another assessor designated from the list drawn up for
the sector of activity concerned shall replace him for the
remaining period of his term office.
Section 134 : (1) The assessors shall be appointed by order of
the Minister of Justice on the proposal of the minister in charge of
labour. They shall be chosen from. lists containing not less than
three names for each post to be rilled submitted by the most
representative trade unions or employer's associations. If these
fail to act or if there are not such organizations, the minister in
charge of labour shall directly make his proposal.
(2) The assessors shall be appointed for a term of two judicial
years and may be re-appointed, provided that the assessors in
office shall continue to act until the new appointments have been
made.
(3) If necessary, the list of assessors may be completed during
the judicial year in the same manner as that prescribed in
Subsection 1. The term of office of the assessors so designated
shall expire at the same time as that of the assessors appointed
on the basis of biennial lists.
Section 135 : (1) The conditions required for appointment as an
assessor shall be those required of the leaders or management of
a trade union or employers' association as set out in Section 10 of
this law, including the following additional conditions :
• (a) an assessor must have performed professional duties for
at least 3 (three) years excluding apprenticeship;
• (b) he must have performed such duties in a area of
jurisdiction of the court for at least the last 3 (three)
months; and
• (c) he must be able to read and write English or French.

[Page 55]
(2) An assessor who is convicted of any of the offences defined in
Section 10 of this law, or who is deprived of his civic rights, shall
automatically forfeit his office as assessor.
Section 136 : Assessors shall take the following oath before the
court in which they are to serve.
"I swear to discharge my duties with zeal and integrity and to
keep the secrecy of the proceedings".
Section 137 : (1) The functions of assessor shall be a civic and
social duty. They shall be performed free of charge.
(2) However, travel and subsistence costs incurred and the
amount of wages and allowances lost as a result of their
attendance at the courts shall be reimbursable to assessors.
(3) The amount of and conditions of granting such allowances
shall be determined by a joint order of the Minister of Justice and
the Minister in charge of Labour.
II - Procedure
Section 138 : (1) The proceedings for the settlement of
individual disputes relating to employment, both in first instance
and on appeal, shall be free of charge.
(2) Any decisions and documents produced shall be registered
duty-free and all procedural costs shall be treated on the same
footing as costs in criminal proceedings in respect of their
payment, charging, settlement and collection.
Section 139 : (1) Any worker or employer shall request the
competent Labour Inspector to settle the dispute out of court.
(2) Rules relating to summons and appearance before the court
shall be determined by order following the recommendation of
the National Labour Advisory Board.
(3) In the case of an amicable settlement, the terms there of
shall be embodied in a statement of conciliation made out by the
Labour Inspector and signed by him and by the parties. Such
settlement of the dispute shall be applicable when the statement

[Page 56]
of conciliation has been endorsed by the president of the
competent court and marked for enforcement.
(4) In cases of partial conciliation, the statement of non
conciliation shall mention the points on which agreement has
been reached and those on which disagreement persists.
(5) If the attempt at conciliation fails, the inspector of labour and
social insurance or his representative shall make out a statement
of non-conciliation.
(6) In all cases referred to above, a copy of the statement signed
by the Labour Inspector and by the parties shall be addressed to
the president of the competent court, and handed to the parties.
Section 140 : (1) In cases of total or partial failure of the
attempt at conciliation to which reference is made in the
preceding section, the action shall be instituted by an oral or
written declaration made to the registrar of the competent court
by the most diligent party.
(2) In order to be receivable, the said declaration shall be
accompanied by a copy of statement of non-conciliation or of
partial conciliation.
(3) The said declaration shall be entered in a register kept
specially for the purpose, and a certificate of the entry shall be
delivered to the party instituting the action.
Section 141: (1) Within two days (not including Sundays and
holidays) of receipt of the petition, the president shall summon
the parties to appear within twelve days (to which travelling time
shall be added in appropriate cases).
(2) The summons shall state the name and occupation of the
plaintiff, the subject matter of petition, and the place, date and
hour for appearance.
(3) The summons shall be served on the person or delivered at
his home in accordance with the provisions of ordinary law.
Service may be validly effected by registered letter with
acknowledgement of receipt.

[Page 57]
Section l42 : (1) The parties shall appear before the court at the
appointed place, date and hour. They may be accompanied or
represented as in the case of proceedings before an ordinary
court of law either by a worker or an employer engaged in the
same branch of activity or by a representative of the trade union
or employers' association to which the party belongs.
More over, an employer may be represented by a manager or
employee of the undertaking or establishment.
(2) Save in the case of counsel, any such authorized
representative shall be appointed by written document.
Section 143 : (1) If the plaintiff fails to appear on the day fixed
for the hearing and fails to show a cause of force majeure, the
case shall be struck off the rolls. It may be resumed once only,
with the same formalities as for the initial petition otherwise it
shall be void. If, after an adjournment, he fails to appear, the
same shall apply.
(2) If the defendant does not appear but or is not properly
represented, the court shall, after examining the case, pronounce
a default judgment.
(3) If the defendant does not appear but has presented his
defence in a written memorandum, the case shall be decided by a
judgment which shall be deemed to have been given after a
hearing of both parties.
(4) Any defendant who has appeared in the proceedings shall not
thereafter be found to be in default. Any judgment given against
him shall be deemed to have been given after a hearing of both
parties.
(5) Whatever the case, the judgment shall be notified in
accordance with the rules prescribed in Section 151 hereunder so
that the period allowed for lodging an appeal may begin to run.
Section 144 : (1) An objection may be made concerning an
assessor of the court :
• (a) If he has a personal interest in the matter in dispute ;

[Page 58]
• (b) If he is related by blood or marriage up to the sixth
degree, to one of the parties ;
• (c) If there have been penal or civil proceedings between
the assessor and one of the parties or the spouse or relative
by marriage in the direct line of the parties ;
• (d) If the assessor has expressed an opinion in writing or
orally on the matter in dispute ;
• (e) If the assessor is the employer or employee of one of
the parties to the case.
(2) The objection shall be made before any oral proceedings
commence. The president shall give a ruling immediately. If the
objection is overruled, the oral proceedings shall begin ; if the
objection is upheld, the case shall be adjourned to the next
hearing.
Section 145 : (1) The court shall proceed immediately with the
examination of the case. If the parties so agree or if the president
so decides, the case may be adjourned for not more than fifteen
days. The court may also order giving reasons, an inquiry, an
inspection of premises or other procedure for procuring
information.
(2) On the resident and the registrar, the court may immediately
deliberate in private. Unless there is a postponement for further
deliberation, which shall be limited to a maximum of eight days,
the judgment shall be handed down immediately and shall
contain reasons.
(3) The record of judgment shall be signed by the president and
the registrar.
Section 146 : The judgment may provisionally order immediate
execution, notwithstanding any motion for a stay of execution of
any appeal, with exemption from surety up to a sum to be fixed
by a statutory instrument. In respect of amounts in excess,
provisional execution may be ordered on condition that surety is
furnished; but it may be ordered without such condition, and in
any amount, nothwithstanding a motion for stay or an appeal, in
the case of wages and perquisites recognized as due and not in
dispute.

[Page 59]
Section 147 : All orders and judgments and all official copies of
contracts and any other documents in respect of which execution
may be ordered shall be marked with the executory formula and
healed as follows :
"Republic Cameroon" "In the name of the people of Cameroon"
and shall close with the following words :
"Therefore the president of the Republic of Cameroon commands
and orders all bailiffs and process-servers by these presents to
give effect order (or judgment, etc.) and all procureurs general,
state counsels and all members of the judicial and Legal Service
and civil servants charged with taking action on behalf ; of the
Republic to lend their aid when so required by law".
"In faith whereof the present order (or judgment, etc.) has been
signed by the president and the registrar".
Section 148 : Orders and judgments shall be executed, if the
parties so request, by baliffs and process-servers.
Section 149 : A worker shall be entitled as of right to the
assistance of the court in the execution of judgment or order in
his favour. The president shall designate a baliff who shall assist
the worker in this regard.
Section 150 : A third party claiming to be owner of all or part of
the property distrained may, before the sale, submit his claim to
the president of the court either orally or in writing. Where the
evidence produced and the arguments put forward so warrant,
the president shall suspend the sale of the articles and effects
claimed and shall then summon the parties within eight days.
After hearing the parties, the president shall make an order for
against the appropriation of the property distrained.
Section 151 : (1) In the case of judgment by default, service on
the defaulting party shall by the registrar of the court without
charge, in the manner prescribed in Section 141 above.
(2) If within ten days of service (plus time allowed for distance)
the defaulting party has not moved for a stay of execution in the
manner prescribed in Section 140 above the judgment shall
become enforceable. On a motion for a stay of execution the

[Page 60]
court shall summon the parties again in the manner prescribed in
Section 141 ; the new judgment shall be enforceable
notwithstanding default.
Section 152 : Except with regard to the labour jurisdiction of the
court, the judgments of courts in matters shall be final and
without appeal if they relate to applications for delivery of
certificates of employment or pay slips.
Section 153 : The courts passing judgments on labour matters
shall deal with all counter-claims or applications for set-off which
by their nature fall within their jurisdiction.
Section 154 : (1) Within 15 days of the handing down of the
judgment in the case of a full hearing, or of its notification in the
case of judgement by default or deemed to have head full
hearing, an appeal may be lodged in the manner prescribed in
Section 140 above.
(2) The appeal shall be transmitted, within eight days of the
declaration of the intention to appeal, to the registrar of the
competent court of appeal.
(3) The appeal shall be determined within two months of the said
declaration of intention to appeal, on the basis of the documents
produced, provided that the parties may be heard at their
request, in which case they may be represented in accordance
with the rules laid down in Section 142 above. The parties shall
be informed by the registrar, at the address given by the parties,
of the date of the hearing, the name of the respondent and the
judgement being appeal.
(4) The court shall give a ruling on the character of the appeal. In
the case of an improper or dilatory appeal, the appellant may be
sentenced to a fine of less than 20,000 and not more than
100,000 francs (5) The court shall designate a bailiff at whose
instance the execution shall be carried out.
Section 155 : (1) A court may, in the interest of justice and at
the request of one of the parties, extend the time-limit provided
for in this section for reasons which shall be stipulated in the
judgment.

[Page 61]
(2) No extension pursuant to the provisions of the present section
shall exceed thirty days.
Section 156 : (1) In all procedural matters not covered by this
chapter, ordinary law provisions shall be applicable only on the
absence of specific provisions laid down in this law.
(2) The conditions of implementation of this chapter, in particular,
as concerns the form of the registers, shall be laid down by
statutory instruments.

CHAPTER II - COLLECTIVE DISPUTES
Section 157 : (1) Any dispute which is characterized by :
(a) The intervention of a group of wage-earning workers, whether
or not the said workers are organized in trade unions, and
(b) The collective nature of the interests at stake shall be deemed
to be a collective labour dispute and shall therefore lie outside the
jurisdiction of the courts to which reference is made in Section
131 above.
(2) Settlement of any collective labour dispute shall be subject to
conciliation and arbitration procedure as provided for in a
Sections 158 and 164 hereunder.
(3) Shall be deemed legitimate any strike or lock-out started after
these arbitration procedures have been exhausted and have
failed.
(4) A strike shall be collective or concerted refusal by all or part
of the workers of an establishment to comply with the normal
labour rules, in order to bring the employer to meet their
demands or claims.
(5) A lock-out shall be the locking of an establishment by the
employer in order to bring pressure to bear on workers on strike
or threatening to go in strike.
I - Conciliation

[Page 62]
Section 158 : (1) The competent Inspector of Labour and Social
Insurance shall be immediately notified by the most diligent party
of collective dispute.
(2) Where the collective agreement does not provide for a
conciliation procedure or in case of failure of such procedure, the
competent Inspector of Labour Insurance shall immediately
convene the parties and attempt to bring about an amical
settlement.
(3) Either of the parties may empower representative to take part
in the conciliation proceedings on its behalf. If a party does no
appear and has not duly appointed a representative, the
Inspector of Labour and Social Insurance shall make a report to
that effect, and the defaulting party may, on the basis of the said
report, be sentenced to a fine of not less than 50,000 and not
more than 500,000 francs.
(4) The Inspector of Labour and Social Insurance shall convene
the parties to meet again not more than forty-eight hours
thereafter.
Section 159 : (1) At the end of the attempt at conciliation the
Inspector of Labour and Social Insurance shall made a report
stating either the agreement or partial or the total disagreement
of the parties. The latter shall sign the statement and shall each
receive a copy thereof.
(2) Any agreement by conciliation shall be enforceable as laid
down in Section 139.
Section 160 : If the attempt at conciliation fails, the Inspector of
Labour and Social Insurance shall be bound to refer the dispute
to the arbitration procedure defined herein-after, within eight (8)
clear days.
II - Arbitration
Section 161 : (1) The arbitration of any collective labour dispute
which has not been settled by conciliation shall be undertaken by
an arbitration board established in the area of each appeal court
and composed as follows :

[Page 63]
• (a) Chairman : A judicial officer of the competent court of
appeal
• (b) Members :
o (i) An employer assessor;
o (ii) A worker assessor.
(2) The two assessors shall be designated by the chairman of the
arbitration board from among assessors appointed to the high
court of the area.
(3) A registrar of the court of appeal shall act are secretary.
Section 162 : (1) The arbitration board shall not make and
award on any matter except those set down in the statement of
non-conciliation and those which have arisen out of events
subsequent to the making of the said statement and are a direct
consequence of the dispute.
(2) The board shall give its award in law in disputes regarding the
interpretation and application of laws, regulations, collective
agreements and company agreements currently in force.
(3) It shall give its award in equity in other disputes, particularly
those relating to wages or to conditions of employment if the
latter are not determined by legislative provisions, regulations,
collective agreements or company agreements currently in force,
and in disputes relating to the negotiations or revision of clauses
or collective agreements.
(4) The arbitration board shall have the wide powers to obtain
information on the economic situation of the undertakings and on
the situation of the workers concerned in the dispute.
(5) It may make any necessary investigations of undertakings
and trade unions and employers' associations and it may require
the parties to produce any document or to provide any
information, whether economic, accounting, financial, statistical
or administrative, which may be useful to it in the performance of
its duties.
(6) It may have recourse to experts and, in general, to any
person duly qualified and likely to be able to inform it.

[Page 64]
Section 163 : (1) An arbitration award shall be notified to the
parties without delay by the competent inspector of labour and
social insurance.
(2) If, at the expiration of a period of eight clear days after
notification, neither party has applied for a stay of execution, the
award become effective in accordance with the provisions of
Section 164 hereunder. The same shall apply if an application for
stay, having been made, is withdrawn before the expiration of the
said period.
(3) An application for stay of execution shall be valid only if it is
made by registered letter, with acknowledgement of receipt, sent
to the Inspector of Labour and Social Insurance of the area.
Section 164 : (1) The putting in to effect of a conciliation
agreement or of an award in respect of which no stay of
execution has been allowed shall be mandatory. If such
agreement or award does not specify a date in this regard, it shall
have effect as from the date of the attempt at conciliation.
(2) A trade union or employer's association duly established in
conformity with this law may institute any proceeding arising out
of a conciliation agreement or arbitration award in respect of
which no application has been made for a stay of execution.
(3) Conciliation agreements and arbitration awards shall be
immediately posted up in the offices of the inspectorate of labour
and social insurance and published in the Official Gazette.
(4) The minutes of agreements and of awards shall be deposited
at the registry of the high court of the place of the dispute.
(5) The conciliation and arbitration procedures shall be free of
charge.
Section 165 : (1) A lock-out or strike undertaken in
contravention of the above provisions may have the following
consequences :
• (a) In case of a lock-out, the employer may :
o (i) be required to pay workers' wages for the days so
lost;

[Page 65]
o (ii) Be declared, for a period of not less than two years,
ineligible for membership of a chamber of commerce
and prohibited from participating in any way
whatsoever in any works enterprise or in any supplies
contract involving the state or a local council. Such
ineligibility shall be pronounced by an ordinary law
court on the application of the minister in charge of
labour and social insurance.
• (b) In case of a strike, the workers may :
o (i) see their contracts terminated on grounds of serious
misconduct;
o (ii) be punished with fine of from 20,000 to 100,000
CFA francs.

PART X - PENALTIES
Section 166 : Any person responsible for the administration or
management of a trade union, and any person committing and
infringement of the provisions of Section 3, 6, 10, 16 and 19 shall
be punished with fine of from 50,000 to 500,000 francs.
Section 167 : (1) Any person committing an infringement of
Sections 29, 30 (1), 40, 41, 44, 50 (1), 51, 62, 64, 86,87 (2), 88,
89, 90, 92, 93, 97, 98 (1), 99, 100, 101, 112 (2) and (3), 114
(1), 115 and 116 ;
(2) Any person making false statements concerning the rules of a
trade union or of an employers' association or the names and
offices of the persons responsible for the administration or
management of such trade union or association ;
(3) Any person falsely claiming to be responsible for the
administration or management of a trade union ;
(4) Any person committing an infringement of the of the decree
provided for in Section 62 (1); and
(5) Any person committing an infringement of the provisions of
collective agreements which have been the subject of a decree of
extension, in matters of wages, bonuses, allowances or any other
benefits in cash,

[Page 66]
shall be punished with fine of from 100,000 to 1,000,000 francs.
Section 168 : (1) Any person committing an infringement of
Sections 26, 27 (2), 67, 68, 75 (1), 82 and 84 (1), (2), (5), and
(4);
(2) Any person who commits, against a worker belonging to a
trade union, an act of discrimination tending to affect freedom of
association as regards employment ;
(3) Any person who engages in any of the practices referred to in
Section 4 (2);
(4) Any person interfering with the proper performance of the
duties of staff representatives ;
(5) Any person who forces a worker to take up employment
against his will or who prevents a worker from taking up
employment, going to work or discharging, in a general manner,
any obligations imposed by his contract;
(6) Any person who, by using a fictitious contract or one which
contains untrue statements, obtains employment or intentionally
takes the place of another worker, and,
(7) Any employer, employer's agent or official in charge who
knowingly enters in the employer's register or other document
false statements concerning the duration of a worker's
employment or he character of his work, and any worker who
knowingly makes use of such false statement; and
(8) Any person who demands or accepts from a worker any
remuneration whatsoever for acting as an intermediary in the
settlement or payment of wages ; allowances or costs of any
kind, or for obtaining an employment or for settling an individual
dispute respecting employment whatever the matter at issue,
shall be punished with fine of from 200,000 to 1,500,000 francs.
Section 169 : (1) Any person who obstructs the performance of
the duties or the exercise of the powers of the Inspectors of
Labour and Social Insurance on the medical inspectors labour and
social insurance shall be punished with a fine of from 1,000,000
francs to 2,000,000 francs.

[Page 67]
Section 170 : (1) In case of a repetition of infringement of the
provisions of Sections 26, 27 (2), 30 (1), 67, 68, 75 (1), 82, 84
(2), (3) and (4), 86, 88, 89, 90, 92, 93, 98 (1) as well as of the
provisions of Sections 167 (3), 168 (2), (3), (4). (5), (6), (7),
(8), and 169, a penalty of imprisonment of from 6 days to 6
months may also be required.
(2) Where the person concerned is a second offender or
whenever the person committing the infringements referred to in
Section 168 (8) is one of the persons responsible for the
administration and a management of trade union or belongs to
the Ministry of Labour and Social Insurance, the penalty of
imprisonment shall be mandatory.
Section 171 : The provisions of the Penal Code shall apply to :
(1) persons guilty of acts of resistance, abuse and force against
inspectors of labour and social insurance and medical inspectors
of labour and social insurance ;
(2) persons committing infringements of the provisions of Section
2 (3); and
(3) persons impersonating inspectors of labour and social
insurance and medical inspectors of labour and social insurance.
Section 172 : The fines provided for in Sections 167, 168, 169
and 170 in respect of infringements of the provisions of Sections
29, 40, 62, 67, 68, 82, 86, 87, 88, 97 and 100 above shall be
multiplied by the number of workers affected by the publishable
offence.
Section 173 : The head of an enterprise shall bear civil liability
for the conviction of his agent or official in charge.

PART XI - SPECIAL TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL
PROVISIONS
Section 174 : In matters where no special provisions have been
stipulated, enterprises benefiting from the Industrial Free Zone
regime shall be bound to apply the provisions of this law and its
implementation instruments

[Page 68]
Section 175 : Vocational training, vocational rehabilitation and
employment of handicapped persons shall be governed by laws.
Section 176 : (1) All previous provisions repugnant to this law
are repealed, in particular law N 74/14 of 27 November 1974 to
institute the Cameroon Labour Code and Law N 68/LF/20 of 18
November 1968 prescribing the form in which trade unions and
employer's associations must be set up in order to qualify for
registration.
(2) Regulations drawn up pursuant to afore-mentioned law N°
74/14 of 27th November, 1974, or those applicable to the said
law but not repugnant to this law shall remain in force until
repealed or replaced.
Section 177 : This law shall be registered, published according
to the procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official Gazette in
English and French.
Yaounde,
14 AUGUST 1992