[Page 1]
Droits d'auteur © Faculté de droit, Section de droit civil, Université d'Ottawa,
1997
This document is protected by copyright law. Use of the services of Érudit
(including reproduction) is subject to its terms and conditions, which can be
viewed online.
https://apropos.erudit.org/en/users/policy-on-use/
This article is disseminated and preserved by Érudit.
Érudit is a non-profit inter-university consortium of the Université de Montréal,
Université Laval, and the Université du Québec à Montréal. Its mission is to
promote and disseminate research.
https://www.erudit.org/en/
Document generated on 08/16/2025 11:44 a.m.
Revue générale de droit
Customary Law, Women's Rights and Traditional Courts in
Cameroon
Joseph N. Temngah
Volume 27, Number 3, September 1996
URI: https://id.erudit.org/iderudit/1035782ar
DOI: https://doi.org/10.7202/1035782ar
See table of contents
Publisher(s)
Éditions Wilson & Lafleur, inc.
ISSN
0035-3086 (print)
2292-2512 (digital)
Explore this journal
Cite this article
Temngah, J. N. (1996). Customary Law, Women's Rights and Traditional Courts
in Cameroon. Revue générale de droit, 27(3), 349–356.
https://doi.org/10.7202/1035782ar
Article abstract
This article highlights the controversy over Women's Rights in Cameroon given
that women are regarded as a man's property under customary law. The article
points out the position of women's rights under statutory law. It compares both
rules without settling for either of them. Both rules are sources of
Cameroonian law and are administered concurrently by the courts. Again, this
article shows the awareness women have demonstrated by challenging the
customary law position which considers a woman as an object. Finally, the
article settles for the codification of laws notwithstanding the difficulties
involved in this exercise, especially in a bi-jural state like Cameroon.

[Page 2]
DROIT COMPARÉ
Customary Law, Women's Rights
and Traditional Courts in Cameroon
JOSEPH N. TÏMNGAH Lecturer at law, Faculty of Laws and Political Sciences
University of Yaounde II, Cameroon
ABSTRACT
This article highlights the controversy
over Women's Rights in Cameroon
given that women are regarded as a
man's property under customary law.
The article points out the position of
women's rights under statutory law. It
compares both rules without settling
for either of them. Both rules are
sources of Cameroonian law and are
administered concurrently by the
courts. Again, this article shows the
awareness women have demonstrated
by challenging the customary law
position which considers a woman as
an object. Finally, the article settles
for the codification of laws
notwithstanding the difficulties
involved in this exercise, especially in
a bi-jural * state like Cameroon.
RESUME
Cet article souligne la controverse
reliée aux droits des femmes au
Cameroun, les femmes y étant perçues
comme la propriété des hommes en
vertu du droit coutumier. Cet article
indique la position des femmes en
vertu du droit statutaire. Il compare
les deux règles sans toutefois trancher
pour Vune ou pour Vautre. Les deux
règles tirent leur source du droit
camerounais et sont administrées
concurremment par les cours. De
plus, cet article témoigne de la
conscience qu 'ont démontrée les
femmes en défiant la position selon
laquelle, en droit coutumier, on
considère la femme comme un objet.
Finalement, cet article tranche en
faveur de la codification des lois
nonobstant les difficultés
occasionnées lors d'un tel exercice,
particulièrement dans un État
bifuridique tel que le Cameroun.
* Editor's note : In Canadian legal English we normally use the expression bi-juridical. We
are respecting the author's terminology.
(1996) 27 R.G.D. 349-356

[Page 3]
350 Revue générale de droit (1996) 27 R.G.D. 349-356
TABLE OF CONTENTS
I. Written law versus customary law 351
IL The applicable quantum of both written and customary law 351
III. Written law 351
IV. Customary law 353
V. The attitude of traditional courts 355
VI. Written and customary law : Which is superior? 355
The debate about women's rights in general and widows' particularly,
has been of much concern to women, policy makers and international organisations
alike. In a typical traditional African milieu, the woman virtually finds herself in an
essentially male-dominated environment. The various customs that obtain in most
African countries, the institutions that regulate day to day life are controlled by
the men-folk. In this way, women have very limited rights. Upon the breakdown of
a customary law marriage through death, the widow suddenly finds herself as an
object of inheritance.] Notwithstanding that this practice is contrary to the law2
cases abound which show that this practice is instead gaining ground. Indeed
upon divorce the woman has little or no rights over property. In Achu v. Achu,4
Inglis, J., posited that :
[...] Customary law does not countenance the sharing of property, especially landed
property, between husband and wife on divorce. The wife is still regarded as part of
her husband's property [...]
Customary law is silent on women rights and our courts seem to apply
and follow these practices. However, the case of Alice Fodje v. Ndansi Kette5 seems
to suggest the contrary view. In this case, the parties were married in 1952 according
to the native laws and customs of the people of Bali. The marriage was blessed with
eight children. In 1981, the appellant left the matrimonial home. The respondent
took a second wife. In 1983, the respondent petitioned for divorce in the Bali cus-
1. See Eko v. Serah Imbole Ngoma, suit N° 28/86-87 C.R. BK. 1/86-87, p. 55 (unre­
ported), Bonjongo Customary Court.
2. Law 81-02 of 29 June 1981 on Civil Status Registration in Cameroon, s. 77(2) of which
provides that : "In the event of death of the husband, his heirs shall have no right over the widow
nor over her freedom or the share of property belonging to her [...]".
3. Christian Taboti v. Mbiekwe Kiembo, Appeal N° BCA/61/86 (unreported); Japhet
Nchanji v. Tanto Gwe'u Appeal N° BCA/11/85 (unreported).
4. Appeal N° BCA/62/86 (unreported).
5. Appeal N° BCA/45/86 (unreported).

[Page 4]
1ÏMNGAH Cameroon : Customary Law, Women's Rights and Traditional Courts 351
tomary court. His prayer was granted. No order as to property adjustment was made.
As a result, the appellant appealed. Justice Arrey in a dramatic manner held that the
appellant should occupy one of the three houses, and also collect rents from the
other two. But the decision seems to be an isolated authority on its own merit.
I. WRITTEN LAW VERSUS CUSTOMARY LAW
Following Justice Arrey's judgment above, the question that easily
springs to mind is as follows : which is superior, written law or customary law?
Both written and customary law are sources of law in Cameroon and it will be
wrong, or perhaps out of context to settle either for the superiority of written law
because it defines the quantum of admissible customary law or the customary law
rules simply because most of the cases are hardly brought to court. Nevertheless,
the people do accept the customs as binding, notwithstanding legislative enact­
ments to the contrary.
II. THE APPLICABLE QUANTUM OF BOTH WRITTEN AND CUSTOMARY LAW
Both written law and rules of customary law are binding on our courts.
But what is the applicable quantum of both?
III. WRITTEN LAW
Written law consists of all laws enacted by the legislative arm of our
State which are binding as soon as they have been promulgated by the Executive
arm of the State. And of course, mindful of the bi-jural nature of the Cameroonian
State, all constitutional enactments have alluded to, and accepted foreign law :
namely English and French laws. Of particular interest to us is English received
law which consists of :
[...] (a) the Common law
(b) the doctrines of equity, and
(e) statutes of general application which were in force in England on the 1st day
of January 1900 [...]7
Indeed, Inglis, J., in the famous case of Enongenekang v. Enongene-
kangs has re-emphasised the bi-jural nature of the Cameroonian state in the fol­
lowing words :
Now there are two systems of law in this Country. In the North West and South
West Provinces, it is the common law, English legislation of general application
which were in force on 1st January 1900 and any particular legislation made appli­
cable by any other law in force.
6. Ibid.
7. S. 11 of the Southern Cameroons High Court Law, 1955.
8. Suit N° HCSW/28MC/82 (unreported).

[Page 5]
352 Revue générale de droit (1996) 27 R.G.D. 349-356
In application of the principles above, the Cameroonian legislature
expressly enacted Ordinance No. 81-02 of 29 June 1981 which deals partially
amongst other matters with the question of property. This piece of legislation has
failed both in its intent and spirit to give guidelines to this disturbing issue of prop­
erty adjustments between husband and wife upon the breakdown of marriage. As a
result, recourse is made to foreign or foreign inspired laws. In the Anglophone
provinces of Cameroon, all Acts pursuant to s. 11 of the Southern Cameroons High
Court Law 1955 are applicable.9 In this respect, the Married Women's Property Act
1882 is instructive. It provides in section 1(1) that :
A married woman shall [...] be capable of acquiring, holding, and disposing by will
or otherwise, of any real or personal property as her separate property, in the same
manner as if she were a feme sole, without the intervention of any trustee.
The recent decision of Lord Denning in Midland Bank Trust Co. and
Another v. Green and Another (No.3)10 throws a lot of insight on this matter. This
is what Lord Denning says :
Nowadays, both in law and in fact, husband and wife are two persons, not one. They
are partners-equal partners-in a joint enterprise, the enterprise of maintaining a
home and bringing up children. Outside that joint enterprise they live their own
lives and go their own ways [...]
The dictum above is reinforced by the position that English law knows
no community of property11 and the famous dictum of Romer, L.J. in the case of
Cobb v. Cobb in reference to section 17 of the Married Women's Property Act
188212 when he said that :
[...] I know of no power that the Court has under section 17 to vary agreed or estab­
lished titles to property. It has the power to ascertain the respective rights of hus­
band and wife to disputed property, and frequently has to do so on very little
material, but where as here, the original rights to property are established by evi­
dence and those rights have not been varied by subsequent agreements, the court
cannot in my opinion under section 17 vary those rights [...]
Section 17 would have been redundant after the divorce had been pro­
nounced since its provisions would have ceased to apply because it refers to "hus­
band" and "wife". To cure these maladies, the Matrimonial Proceedings and
Property Act 1970 in its section 39 allows an application within the period of three
years to be made by either party notwithstanding that their marriage has been dis­
solved or annulled.
Cameroonian courts are content with applying the principles adum­
brated above with caution. In the various local cases, effect has been given to local
9. S. 11 guarantees the application of foreign law in Anglophone Cameroon.
10. [1982] Ch. 529, p. 539.
11. Pettitt v. Pettitu [ 1969] 2 All E.R. 385, H.L.
12. Section 17 provides that :
In any question between husband and wife as to the title or possession of property,
either of them may apply to the High Court or to a County Court and the Judge may
make such order with respect to the property in dispute [...] as he thinks fit.
13. Cobb v. Cobb, [1955] 2 All E.R., p. 700.

[Page 6]
TtMNGAH Cameroon : Customary Law, Women's Rights and Traditional Courts 353
statutory enactments particularly the 1981 Ordinance. In substance, it provides that
a married woman can exercise a trade different from that of her husband and can
operate a separate bank account. Indeed, if the woman purchases property with
her income or sums from her account, ownership and title rest in her name. Conse­
quently, in Moussi v. Moussi16 the court ordered that items of moveable property
bought by the wife but still in custody of the husband be handed over to her. In the
same strand of reasoning the High Court of Buea held in Body Lawson v. Body
Law son11 that each spouse should continue to have ownership of property pur­
chased in their respective names.
The above has been the statutory view. Now, I shall examine the cus­
tomary law area of the debate.
IV. CUSTOMARY LAW
Section 2 of the Evidence Ordinance, Cap. 62 of the Laws of the Feder­
ation of Nigeria 1958 provides that : "Custom is a rule which, in a particular dis­
trict, has, from long usage, obtained the force of law".
These rules were applicable in the various ethnic groups before the
advent of the European colonizers and were enforced by traditional courts presided
over by local chiefs18 and elders. In the British Cameroons for example, the var­
ious Orders-in-Council that set up the British Administration provided for the
respect of native laws and customs.19
Section 27(1) of the Southern Cameroon's High Court Law, 1955 gives
judicial backing to the continuous application of customary law rules as well as its
applicable quantum. It provides in whole that :
The High Court shall observe, and enforce the observance of every native law and
custom which is not repugnant to natural justice, equity and good conscience nor
incompatible with any law for the time being in force, and nothing in this law shall
deprive any person of the benefit of any such native law or custom.
From the provisions of s. 27(1) above, it can be asserted that our customary
law must be enforceable by our non-customary courts, (the courts of First Instance, the
High Court, the Court of Appeal and the Supreme Court). Even the provisions of
section 2 of the Evidence Act alludes to the role of courts in enforcing customs. Again
section 18(l)(a) of the Customary Courts Ordinance Cap. 142 of the Laws of the Feder­
ation of Nigeria 1948, customary law shall be :
The native law and custom prevailing in the area of jurisdiction of the court so far as
it is not repugnant to natural justice, equity and good conscience, nor incompatible
either directly or by natural implication with any written law for the time being in
force.
14. S. 74( 1 ) of the 1981 Ordinance.
15. See Enie v. Enie, suit N° HCSW/65MC/83 (unreported); Body Lawson v. Body
Lawson, suit N° HCF/128Mc/86 (unreported); Jones v. Maynard, [1952] 1 All E.R. 802.
16. Suit N° NCF/115MC/87 (unreported).
17. Supra, note 14.
18. E.N. NGWAFOR, Family Law in Anglophone Cameroon, University of Regina Press,
Saskatchewan, 1993, p. 7.
19. See article 6, Northern Nigeria Order-in-Council 1899.

[Page 7]
354 Revue générale de droit (1996) 27 R.G.D. 349-356
In the light of the authorities above, whenever there is a conflict
between any written law and custom, the former shall prevail.20 In order to arrive at
this, certain conditions must be met. First of all, the custom must be reasonable and
must have been practised from time immemorial.21 Secondly, the customs must
pass two tests, namely, the repugnancy and incompatibility tests. That is to say for
the custom to be applicable it must not be :
i) repugnant to natural justice, equity and good conscience or
ii) incompatible either directly or by natural implication with any written law for
the time being in force.
The controversy as to the application of customary law has been
resolved by subjecting the validity of customary law to decisions of non-customary
courts. In the Nigerian case of Liadi Giwa v. Bisiriyu Erinmilukon,22 Taylor, F.J.
pointed out that :
It is a well established principle of law that native law and custom is a matter of
evidence to be decided on the facts presented before the court in each particular
case, unless it is of such notoriety and has been frequently followed by the courts
that judicial notice would be taken of it without evidence required in proof.23
Section 73(1 )(2) of the Evidence Ordinance directs the courts to take
judicial notice of all general customs, rules and principles which have been held to
have the force of law in or by any superior courts, all customs which have been
duly certified to and recorded in any such court.
In the light of the above, customary law shall apply as long as it fulfils
the conditions laid down by law. Thus, the courts are bound to uphold customs that
follow the provisions of the law. In this respect, the case of Ngeh v. Ngome is
helpful. The court in that case rejected a plea of customary law basing paternity on
bride-price. On the contrary, a custom forbidding the sending away of a nursing
mother from the matrimonial home was enforced.26
The various customs command respect in their areas of jurisdiction.
Members of that given ethnic group may not feel bound by the various qualifica­
tions on customary law. In this case, it applies to its adherents as long as it has not
been submitted to the various tests.27 In Agbortar & Oben v. Chief Bessong,
Endeley, J. pointed out that :
The custom that every chief in his state (and in particular those of the forest areas)
rules through a traditional council is so notorious that this court is bound to take
judicial notice of it.
20. C. ANYANGWE, The Cameroonian Judicial System, Yaounde : CEPER, 1987, p. 243.
21. J.N. TlEMNGAH, The Rights of Widowhood in Former West Cameroon. A Case Study of
the Fungom Area, (maîtrise dissertation), Faculty of Laws and Economics, Yaounde, 1990, p. 45.
22. [1961] 1 All N.L.R. 294.
23. Ibid, p. 296.
24. See also section 58 of the Evidence Ordinance.
25. (1962-64) WCLR 321.
26. Immaculate Vefonge v. Samuel Lyonga Yukpe, Appeal N°CASWP/CC/21/81 (un­
reported).
27. J.N. TEMNGAH, supra, note 21, p. 17.
28. (1968) WCLR 43.

[Page 8]
TfcMNGAH Cameroon : Customary Law, Women's Rights and Traditional Courts 355
This means that if no appeal is filed, the party concerned would accept
the custom as valid and binding. Ignorant parties are likely going to continue suf­
fering this fate. In Emmanuel Kengnjisu Mundi, v. Elizabeth Regina Mundi the
respondent had been declared joint next of kin with the applicant over the estate
of late Dr. Hosea Abongu Mundi, by the Tubah Customary Court. Giving effect to
the declaratory judgement, Ndoping, J. excluded the applicant and held that the
respondent was entitled as of right to Letters of Administration of the deceased
(being his widow) since he had opted out of the traditional mode of life such that
his estate could not be governed by customary law rules.
V. THE ATTITUDE OF TRADITIONAL COURTS
Although, traditional courts have jurisdiction over all matters other than
landed property whose value does not exceed 69.000F CFA,3 it is immaterial that
the woman contributed to the acquisition of the property either directly or indi­
rectly. The case of Teneng Lucas v. Nchang Irene31 is authority for the view that
customary courts rarely discuss the question of property rights. This is in line with
the provision of section 8 of the Customary Courts Ordinance. The Appeal Court
in Ngnitedem Etienne v. Tashi Lydia Sinaga32 refused to enforce a woman's right
over land and buildings. Inglis, J., delivering the judgement of the Court of Appeal
rejected the plea on the basis that the woman had not tendered any independent evi­
dence to support her claim.
The attitude of our traditional courts have been the same considering
that its jurisdiction is limited. Thus, any claim over property can only be handled
by non-traditional courts. Cases33 abound to illustrate the view that our court deci­
sions follow the same direction. The dictum of Inglis, J., in Achu v. Achu remains
valid and unchallenged.
VI. WRITTEN AND CUSTOMARY LAW : WHICH IS SUPERIOR?
A debate as to the superiority of written law and customary law is
unnecessary. This is because a compromise between the two categories of rules
have been set. In his authoritative document entitled : The Cameroonian Judicial
System35 Anyangwe, C, has pointed out that since independence and reunification
the official policy of the Cameroonian Legislature has been to harmonise and
codify all the laws in force in the country.
29. Bamenda High Court suit N° HCB/130M/88 (unreported).
30. Section 8, Customary Court Ordinance, Cap. 142 of the Laws of the Federation of
Nigeria, 1948.
31. CS N° 257/85-86CRB 1 /86-87, p. 37, Mankon Customary Court.
32. Appeal N° BCA/46/86 (unreported).
33. Awah Patrick Chefor v. Siriwah Atanga Justine, CS N° 82/86-87 CRB II, p. 58,
Mankon Customary Court (unreported); Ambache v. Ambache, CS N° 192/85-86, p. 41, Mankon
Customary Court (unreported) cited in E.N. NGWAFOR, supra, note 18, p. 204.
34. Supra, note 4.
35. Supra, note 18.

[Page 9]
356 Revue générale de droit (1996) 27 R.G.D. 349-356
From this strand of reasoning, it can be concluded that although written
law shall prevail over customary law, it must not be forgotten that customary law is a
kind of gloss to law. This is so when the law is silent on certain aspects. Here, cus­
tomary law would be admissible to fill in the gaps and complete the law in cases
where no solution would have been obtained. There is a certain complementarity
between law and customs. Although, some customary law practices which are
repugnant and incompatible do persists, it can be asserted that as far as the rights of
women are concerned, much has been achieved and a little more is desired to attain
relative equality between the sexes.
Joseph N. Temngah
B.P. 8207 YAOUNDE
(Cameroun)
Tél.: (237)31-24-79
Téléc: (237)23-65-53