[Page 1]
REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON
         Peace – Work – Fatherland
            -----------
NATIONAL ASSEMBLY
      8TH LEGISLATIVE PERIOD
      LEGISLATIVE YEAR 2012
      1
ST  EXTRAORDINARY SESSION
              (April  2012)

LAW
RELATING TO THE ELECTORAL CODE

         The National Assembly deliberated and adopted,
         at its plenary sitting held on Friday 13 April 2012,
                             Bill No. 911/PJL/AN set out as follows:

[Page 2]
 2

PART  I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1 .- (1) This law relates to the electoral code.

                       (2) In particular, it lays down:

- Provisions specific to the body responsible for the  organization,
management and supervision of all election and referendum operations;
- Common provisions governing the election of the President of the Republic,
Members of Parliament and Municipal Councillors and to Referendums;
- Provisions specific to the vacancy of and election to the Presidency of the
Republic;
- Provisions specific to the election of Members of Parliament to the National
Assembly;
- Provisions specific to the election of municipal councillors;
- Provisions specific to referendums;
- Provisions applicable to the election of senators;
- Provisions applicable to the election of Regional councillors;
- Provisions specific to voting by Cameroonian citize ns based or resident
abroad;
- Provisions specific to the funding of political parties and election campaigns
and referendums.

SECTION 2 .- (1) Elections shall be by universal suffrage and by equal and secret
ballot.
                    (2) Suffrage may be direct or indirect under the terms and conditions
provided for by the Constitution and by this law.

SECTION 3
.- The organization, management and supervision of all election and
referendum operations shall devolve upon “Elections Cameroon”, abbreviated as
“ELECAM”.

[Page 3]
 3

PART II

PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO THE BODY RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
ORGANIZATION, MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION OF ALL ELECTION
AND REFERENDUM OPERATIONS

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 4 .- (1) “Elections Cameroon” shall be an independent body
responsible for the organization, management and supervision of all election
and referendum operations.
             (2) Elections Cameroon shall perform i ts duties in keeping with
the Constitution and laws
 and regulations in force.
              (3) Elections Cameroon shall have leg al personality and
management autonomy.
                 (4) The Head Office of Elections Cameroon shall be in Yaounde.

SECTION 5
.-  (1) Members of Elections Cameroon shall refrain from any act that
may undermine the independence and dignity of their  duties. They shall
specifically, during their tenure of office, refrai n from using their status for
purposes other than those relating to their mandate.
                     (2) Members of Elections Camer oon shall, under no
circumstances, seek or receive instructions or orde rs from a public or private
authority, be it national or foreign, during the performance of their duties.
SECTION 6 .- (1) Members of Elections Cameroon may not be prose cuted,
investigated, arrested, detained or tried for their  views expressed in the
performance of their duties.
                    (2) Save in cases of flagrante delicto , members of Elections
Cameroon may not be prosecuted during their tenure of office.

[Page 4]
 4

CHAPTER II
DUTIES
SECTION 7 .- (1) Elections Cameroon shall be responsible for the
organization, management and supervision of electio n and referendum
operations.
 (2) In this respect, Elections Cameroon shall be v ested with all the
requisite powers to perform its duties.

CHAPTER III
ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONING

Section 8
.- Elections Cameroon shall perform its duties thro ugh the following
organs:
• The Electoral Board (EB);
• The General Directorate of Elections (GDE).

SECTION 9 .- (1) Elections Cameroon shall be under the author ity of the
Electoral Board.
                        (2) The Electoral Board sha ll ensure the smooth functioning of
Elections Cameroon.

I – THE ELECTORAL BOARD
A – DUTIES

SECTION 10 .-  (1) The Electoral Board shall ensure compliance wi th the
electoral law by all stakeholders for the purpose o f guaranteeing regular,
impartial, free, fair, transparent and credible polls.
        (2) In this respect, the Electoral Board sh all:
- carry out any verifications and controls it may deem appropriate;

[Page 5]
 5

- scrutinize candidacy papers and publish the final l ist or lists of
candidates contesting presidential, legislative, se natorial, regional and
municipal elections;
- forward election reports to the Constitutional Coun cil or bodies provided
for by law;
- ensure the timely publication and notification of t he list of members of
local polling commissions to the appropriate person s specified in the
electoral law, notably representatives of lists of candidates or
candidates;
- control the preparation of election material and el ection documents
within the deadlines laid down by law;
- hear and determine claims and petitions regarding p re-election and
election operations, subject to the jurisdiction of  the Constitutional
Council and appropriate courts or authorities;
- order corrections warranted following consideration of claims or petitions
filed in respect of elections or referendums.

SECTION 11
: (1) Within the framework of its duties, the Electoral Board shall:
- adopt the by-laws of Elections Cameroon;
- submit reports and/or proposals to the relevant authorities on issues
that fall within their competence;
- examine and approve draft budgets prepared by the Director General of
Elections;
- approve the action programme prepared by the Director General of
Elections;
- approve progress reports drawn up by the Director General of
Elections;
- give its opinion or make suggestions on any election-related draft
instrument submitted to it;
- on the proposal of the Director General of Elections, determine the
organization and conditions of functioning of branches;

  (2) The Electoral Board shall hold consultations wi th the
Administration, the judiciary, political parties an d the civil society within the
framework of the management of the electoral process.

[Page 6]
 6

B - COMPOSITION AND TENURE OF OFFICE
SECTION 12 : (1) The Electoral Board shall comprise eighteen (18) members,
including 1 (one) Chairperson and 1 (one) Vice-Chairperson.
  (2) Members of the Electoral Board shall be desig nated from
among independent personalities of Cameroonian nati onality, recognized for
their competence, moral uprightness, intellectual h onesty, patriotism,
neutrality and impartiality.
  (3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and members  of the
Electoral Board shall be appointed by decree of the  President of the Republic
upon consultation with political parties represente d in the National Assembly
and civil society.
  (4) The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the E lectoral Board
shall be the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of Elections Cameroon.
  (5) The term of office of members of the Electora l Board shall be
four (4) years, renewable as appropriate.
  (6) Before assuming office, members of the Electo ral Board shall
take the following oath before the Constitutional C ouncil: “I swear to fully
and faithfully discharge my duties and to exercise my office without fear
or favour in accordance with the Constitution and l aws in force, to
ensure the confidentiality of proceedings and votes , to abstain from
taking public positions and to decline any consulta tion on matters
falling within the purview of Elections Cameroon.”
  (7) They shall be bound to declare their property  and assets.

SECTION 13
: (1) An Electoral Board member’s term of office sh all expire in
one of the following cases:
- non-renewal of the term;
- resignation;
- death.

  (2) The resignation referred to in Sub-section (1 ) above shall be
duly established by the Electoral Board. In such ca se, the member whose
resignation has been established shall be replaced by the President of the
Republic, upon consultation with the Chairperson of  the Electoral Board. The

[Page 7]
 7
member appointed shall serve the remainder of the t erm of the person
resigning. He shall take the oath as set out in Section 12 (6) above.
SECTION 14 : (1) Temporary incapacity of a member shall be dul y
established by Elections Cameroon. Where such incap acity exceeds 6 (six)
months, the duties of such member may be terminated  by decree of the
President of the Republic.
 (2) The member appointed to replace the incapacita ted member
shall serve the remainder of the latter’s term. He shall take the oath as set out
in Section 12 (6) above.
SECTION 15
: An Electoral Board member’s term of office may be terminated
in one of the following cases:
- physical or mental incapacity duly established by the Electoral Board;
- gross misconduct, notably breach of oath, duly established by the
Electoral Board;
- penalty imposed for a felony (life or fixed-term imprisonment coupled
with banishment and civic disqualification).

SECTION 16
: A member whose term comes to an end, pursuant to the
provisions of Sections 13, 14 and 15 above, shall not be candidate for any
election following the end of such term.

C -  INCOMPATIBILITIES

SECTION 17 : The duties of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and member of
the Electoral Board shall be incompatible with those of:
- Member of Government and persons ranking as such;
- Member of the Constitutional Council;
- Judicial/Legal Officer in active employment;
- Secretary-General of a ministry and persons ranking as such;
- General Manager of a public establishment, public and semi-public
enterprise;
- Central administration director and persons ranking as such;
- Person holding an elective office in a national, regional or local body;
- Governor, Secretaries General  and Inspectors General in the
Governor’s office;
- Senior Divisional Officer, Sub-divisional Officer  and their Assistants;
- Traditional ruler;
- President of  Trades Chamber;

[Page 8]
 8

- Official and personnel of the forces of law and order in active
employment;
- Person disqualified or ineligible for elections;
- Candidates standing for the elections supervised by Elections
Cameroon;
- Members of a political party or support group of a political party, list of
candidates or candidate.

D - FUNCTIONING

SECTION 18 : The Electoral Board shall hold 4 (four) ordinary sessions each
year when convened by its Chairperson. However, when the need arises or at
the request of 2/3 (two-thirds) of its members, the  Board shall meet in
extraordinary session.
SECTION 19
: (1) During an election period, the Electoral Board shall meet as
often as necessary.
  (2) The Electoral Board shall meet at least once every fortnight
upon the convening of the electorate.
SECTION 20
: Meetings of the Electoral Board shall be convened  by the
Chairperson or, where the latter is unavailable, by the Vice-Chairperson.
SECTION 21 : (1) Decisions of the Electoral Board shall be tak en by
consensus or, failing that, decisions shall be take n by a simple majority of
members present. In the event of a tie, the Chairperson shall have the casting
vote.
  (2) The quorum shall be at least 2/3 (two-thirds)  of members
present.
  (3) Minutes of Electoral Board meetings shall be taken, and shall
be signed by the Chairperson and Secretary.
  (4) The secretarial services of Electoral Board m eetings shall be
provided by the General Directorate of Elections.

[Page 9]
 9

CHAPTER IV
GENERAL DIRECTORATE OF ELECTIONS
SECTION 22 : The General Directorate of Elections shall be resp onsible for
the preparation and material organization of electi on and referendum
operations, under the supervision of the Electoral Board.
SECTION 23 : (1) The General Directorate of Elections shall be  under the
authority of a Director General, who may be assiste d by a Deputy Director
General.
  (2) The duties of Director General and Deputy Dir ector General
shall be incompatible with the duties or offices referred to in Section 17 of this
law.
I – APPOINTMENT

SECTION 24 : (1) The Director General and the Deputy Director General of
Elections shall be appointed by decree of the Presi dent of the Republic for a
term of 5 (five) years, which may be renewable upon  consultation with the
Electoral Board.

  (2) In the event of vacancy of the office of Dire ctor General or
Deputy Director General of Elections, he/she shall be replaced in accordance
with the procedure laid down in Sub-section (1) abo ve, to serve for the
remainder of the term.
SECTION 25
: (1) The duties of Director General or Deputy Dire ctor General
of Elections shall be terminated in one of the following cases:
- non-renewal of the term of office;
- resignation;
- death.

  (2) The term of office of the Director General or  Deputy Director
General of Elections may be terminated in one of the following cases:
- physical or mental incapacity duly established by the Electoral Board;
- gross misconduct, duly established by the Electoral Board;
- penalty imposed for a felony (life or fixed-term im prisonment coupled
with banishment and civic disqualification).

[Page 10]
 10

II – DUTIES
SECTION 26 : (1) The Director General of Elections shall be re sponsible,
under the authority of the Electoral Board, for all  election and referendum
operations, in particular:
- drawing up, managing, updating and keeping the national voters’
register as well as election documents and materials;
- procuring and distributing election materials and documents;
- drawing up electoral registers, in conjunction with the relevant joint
commissions;
- publishing electoral registers;
- issuing voter cards;
- distributing voter cards, in conjunction with the relevant joint
commissions;
- organizing or supervising the training of electoral personnel;
- preparing the annual draft budget of Elections Cameroon;
- preparing draft budgets of elections;
- executing the budget of Elections Cameroon and the budget of
elections;
- managing sundry resources and equipment placed at his disposal;
- receiving and forwarding to the Electoral Board candidacy papers for
presidential, legislative, senatorial, regional and municipal elections;
- receiving and forwarding to the Electoral Board applications to
participate in referendum campaigns;
- distributing, within the statutory time-limit, samples of ballot papers to
candidates or political parties taking part in the polls for election or
referendum campaign purposes;
- coordinating the work of observers accredited by the appropriate
national authorities;
- organizing polling stations;
- coordinating all bodies responsible for election operations;
- coordinating the forwarding of election reports and other election
documents from polling stations to the head office of Elections
Cameroon;
- forwarding election reports to the Electoral Board.

  (2) In this respect, the Director General of Elec tions shall be
vested with all powers necessary for the performance of his duties.
  (3) He shall report on his activities to the Elec toral Board at least
once every three months and as often as may be nece ssary in an election
period.

[Page 11]
 11
  (4) After every election, the Director General of  Elections
shall be responsible for centralizing and keeping a ll election documents and
materials.
  (5) He shall draw up the final report on the cond uct of the poll.
SECTION 27
: (1) The Director General of Elections shall be re sponsible,
under the authority of the Electoral Board, for the  administration of Elections
Cameroon.
  (2) He shall attend Electoral Board meetings in a n advisory
capacity.
  (3) He shall represent Elections Cameroon within the framework
of his duties and may go to law.
  (4) The Deputy Director General of Elections shal l perform such
duties and carry out such missions as shall be entr usted to him by the
Director General of Elections within the framework of the administration of
Elections Cameroon.

III – SUPPORT BODIES

SECTION 28 : (1) The General Directorate of Elections shall ha ve support
bodies.
  (2) The organization and functioning of support b odies referred to
under Section 28 (1) above shall be laid down by th e Electoral Board, upon
the proposal of the Director General of Elections.
  (3) Officials of support bodies shall be appointe d by the Director
General of Elections, upon the approval of the Electoral Board.

IV – STAFF

SECTION 29 : (1) The Director General of Elections shall recru it staff on
behalf of Elections Cameroon, in keeping with the l aws and regulations in
force.
  (2) He may also request the secondment of civil s ervants or
transfer of State contract workers governed by the Labour Code and
Categories 1-6 State employees.

[Page 12]
 12
  (3) Staff of Elections Cameroon shall be governed  by the
in-house staff rules adopted by the Electoral Board  in keeping with the laws
and regulations in force.
  (4) Throughout their employment, civil servants s econded or
transferred, shall be governed by labour laws, subj ect to the general rules
and regulations of the Civil Service in respect of retirement, advancement and
end of secondment.
  (5) During the election period, the Director Gene ral of Elections
may hire temporary staff for the period required to perform specific duties.

V - BRANCHES
SECTION 30 : (1) Elections Cameroon shall have branches at reg ional,
divisional and council levels.
  (2) The organization and functioning of branches shall be laid
down by the Electoral Board, upon the proposal of the Director General of
Elections.
  (3) Officers of the regional branches shall be ap pointed by the
Electoral Board, on the recommendation of the Director General of Elections.
  (4) Officials of the divisional and council branc hes shall be
appointed by the Director General of Elections, upon the approval of the
Electoral Board.

CHAPTER V

FINANCIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 31 : The resources of Elections Cameroon shall be publ ic funds
managed in compliance with public accounting rules.
SECTION 32 : (1) Elections Cameroon shall have an annual budge t and an
elections budget in an election year.
  (2) The Director General of Elections shall be th e authorizing
officer of the budget of Elections Cameroon and of the elections budget.

[Page 13]
 13
SECTION 33 : (1) The draft budgets referred to in Section 32 a bove shall
be prepared by the Director General of Elections an d approved by the
Electoral Board.
  (2) The Chairperson of the Electoral Board shall forward the draft
budgets referred to in Sub-section (1) above to Gov ernment for concerted
consideration and tabling before Parliament for ado ption as part of the
Finance Law.
SECTION 34:
  (1) The Electoral Board shall have a special approp riation set
out in the Finance Law, to be used to pay the staff  referred to in section 41
below.
  (2) The Treasury Accounting Officer provided for in Section 36
below shall execute the expenditure of the Electoral Board in accordance with
the instruments in force.
  (3) At the end of the financial year, he shall pr epare a statement of
expenditure which he shall submit to the Minister i n charge of finance for
auditing. Such statement of expenditure shall be ac companied by the other
accounting documents to be forwarded to the Audit Bench.
SECTION 35
: (1) Upon adoption of the State budget by Parliame nt, the
Minister in charge of finance shall disburse funds to Elections Cameroon as
priority State expenditure as set out in the appropriations of the Finance Law.

  (2) Where elections are held in a non-election ye ar, the State shall
take appropriate measures to allocate requisite res ources to Elections
Cameroon for the organization of the elections.
SECTION 36
: The Minister in charge of finance shall appoint a Treasury
Accounting Officer to Elections Cameroon.  .
SECTION 37:
 (1) An Auditor shall be appointed to Elections Cam eroon by
the Minister in charge of finance for a term of off ice of 3(three) years,
renewable once.
  (2) At the end of every financial year, the Audit or shall submit to
the Minister in charge of finance a report on the financial management of
Elections Cameroon.
SECTION 38
: The administrative accounts and management accounts of
Elections Cameroon shall be submitted annually to the Minister in charge of
finance and to the Audit Bench of the Supreme Court.

[Page 14]
 14

SECTION 39 : The accounts of Elections Cameroon shall be audited annually
by the relevant State services.

CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 40:  A decree of the President of the Republic shall lay  down the
protocol ranks and privileges of the Chairperson an d Vice-Chairperson of the
Electoral Board, members of the Electoral Board, as  well as the Director
General and Deputy Director General of Elections.
SECTION 41
: (1) The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Electoral
Board as well as the Director General and the Deputy Director General of
Elections shall be entitled to monthly remuneration and benefits in kind.
   (2) Members of the Electoral Board shall be enti tled to session
allowance during Electoral Board meetings and shall  be reimbursed all
expenses incurred in respect of such meetings upon production of supporting
documents.
         (3) Allowances and mission allowances shal l be granted to
members of the Electoral Board.
                 (4) The monthly remuneration, session allowances, allowances
and mission allowances referred to in Sub-sections 1, 2 and 3 above shall be
determined by decree of the President of the Republic.
SECTION 42
: The rules of procedure and modus operandi  of Elections
Cameroon shall be laid down by by-laws.
 SECTION 43
 (1) Government services shall collaborate with and  support
Elections Cameroon in the performance of its statutory duties.
  (2) The Minister in charge of territorial adminis tration shall ensure
permanent liaison between Government and Elections Cameroon. In this
respect, the latter shall submit copies of minutes and progress reports to him.
SECTION 44 : (1) In the event of shortcomings or dysfunctions on the
part of Elections Cameroon, the President of the Re public shall take the
remedial measures he deems necessary.

[Page 15]
 15
  (2) Pursuant to Articles 5 and 8 of the Constitut ion, the
President of the Republic may terminate, as the cas e may be, the duties
of the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and members of  the Electoral
Board as well as those of the Director General and Deputy Director
General of Elections.
PART III
COMMON PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE ELECTION OF THE
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC, MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT,
MUNICIPAL COUNCILLORS AND REFERENDUMS

CHAPTER I
THE ELECTORATE
I - QUALIFICATION OF ELECTORS
 SECTION 45 : Every person of Cameroonian nationality of either  sex, who
has reached the age of 20 (twenty) years, is regist ered on an electoral
register and is free from all cases of disqualifica tion provided for by law, shall
be entitled to be an elector.
SECTION 46 :  (1) Every Cameroonian citizen enjoying the right  to vote who
has  their home  of origin or place of abode within a co uncil area or has
actually been resident therein for at least the las t 6 (six) months may be
entered in the electoral register in such council area.
  (2) Every Cameroonian citizen who does not satisfy the age or
residence conditions at the time of revision of ele ctoral registers may also be
entered in the electoral register, provided they sa tisfy such conditions before
final closure of the said register or, if need be, polling day.
  (3) Every member of the Armed Forces and person o f equivalent
status in any corps may be entered in the electoral register of the place where
their unit or home port is established without taki ng into account the
residence condition.
  (4) Every citizen who proves that their name is o n the income tax
assessment list of a given constituency for the fif th consecutive year may
likewise be entered on the electoral register of such constituency.
  (5) In the case referred to in Sub-section (4) ab ove, any
application for registration shall necessarily be a ccompanied by a certificate
issued by the Council Branch of Elections Cameroon having jurisdiction over
the applicant’s place of abode or habitual residenc e to the effect that the

[Page 16]
 16
applicant is not registered or that they  have been struck off the electoral
register.
II - ELECTORAL DISQUALIFICATIONS
SECTION 47 : Whoever:
(a) has been convicted of a felony, even by default;
(b) has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment, without suspension, of
more than 3 (three) months;
(c) has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment, accompanied by
suspension of sentence or probation, of more than 6 (six) months;
(d) is the subject of a warrant of arrest;
(e) is an un-discharged bankrupt who has been so adjudged either by a
Cameroonian court or a foreign judgment enforceable in Cameroon;
(f) is insane  or of unsound mind,
shall not be entered on the electoral register.
SECTION 48
: (1) Whoever has been convicted of any offence aga inst the
security of the State, without being rehabilitated or granted amnesty, may not
be entered on any electoral register for a period of 10 (ten) years.
  (2) The period of 10 (ten) years provided for in Sub-section (1)
above shall run from the day of release for persons  sentenced to a term of
imprisonment or from the day of payment of the fine, where applicable.

CHAPTER II
ELECTORAL COMMISSIONS
SECTION 49 : Joint electoral commissions shall be set up and c harged
respectively with preparing electoral activities, o rganizing and supervising
election operations, polling operations and the final counting of votes.

I - COMMISSIONS CHARGED WITH PREPARING ELECTORAL
ACTIVITIES
 SECTION 50 : Preparing electoral activities shall include draw ing up and
revising electoral registers as well as the issuanc e and distribution of voters’
cards.

[Page 17]
 17

A - Commissions Charged with the Revision of Electoral Registers
SECTION 51 : Electoral registers shall be drawn up by the branc hes of
Elections Cameroon, in conjunction with the competent joint commissions.
SECTION 52:  (1) In every council, there shall be a commission c harged with
the revision of the electoral registers. Where the area or size of the population
of the council so warrants, the Director General of  Elections may set up
several electoral register revision commissions.
  (2) The electoral register revision commission sh all comprise:
Chairman:  a representative of Elections Cameroon, appointed by the officer
of the divisional branch of Elections Cameroon;
Members:
- a representative of the Administration, appointed by the Sub-divisional
Officer;
- the Mayor, or a Deputy Mayor or a Municipal Councillor, appointed by
the Mayor;
- a representative of each legalized political party operating within the
territorial  jurisdiction of the council concerned.
  (3) The Sub-divisional Officer, the Mayor and eac h political party
must, within at least 15 (fifteen) days before the revision of the electoral
register commences, notify the Council Branch of El ections Cameroon of the
names of their representatives appointed to sit on the commission.
  (4) Where a political party fails to appoint a re presentative in good
time, the Head of the Council Branch of Elections C ameroon may, after a
formal notice remains unheeded, appoint a civil soc iety personality to the
commission.
  (5) Where the Mayor fails to appoint a representa tive in good time,
the Head of the Council Branch of Elections Cameroo n shall, after a formal
notice remains unheeded, refer the matter to the Se nior Divisional Officer
who shall appoint a council official to sit on the commission as the
representative of the Council.
  (6) The composition of each voter register revisi on commission
shall be approved by a decision of the Head of the Divisional Branch of
Elections Cameroon.
  (7) The duties of member of the revision commissi on shall be
honorary.

[Page 18]
 18
  (8) The work of the commission may be validly car ried
out by a single member provided that all the other members are kept
informed of such work prior to its completion.
  (9) At the end of its proceedings, the voter regi ster revision
commission shall draw up a report, signed by the Pr esident and
commissioners.

B -       Commissions charged with supervising the issuance a nd
distribution of voter cards
SECTION 53 : (1) In every Council area, there shall be one or se veral
commissions charged with supervising the issuance a nd distribution of voter
cards.
(2) This commission referred to in (1) above shall comprise the following:
Chairperson:  a representative of Elections Cameroon, appointed by the
Head of the Divisional Branch of Elections Cameroon;
Members:
- a representative of the Administration, appointed by the Sub-divisional
Officer;
- the Mayor, or a Deputy Mayor or a Municipal Councillor, appointed by
the Mayor;
- a representative of each legally authorized political party  operating
within the jurisdiction of the council concerned.
  (3) The composition of the commission charged wit h supervising
the preparation and distribution of voter cards shall be approved by a decision
of the Head of the Divisional Branch of Elections C ameroon who, at least 15
(fifteen) days before the distribution of voter car ds commences, shall
transform the commissions charged with the revision  of electoral registers
into commissions charged with supervising the prepa ration and distribution of
voter cards.
  (4) At the end of its deliberations, the commissi on charged with
supervising the preparation and distribution of vot er cards shall draw up a
report, signed by the Chairperson and commissioners.

[Page 19]
 19

II - LOCAL POLLING COMMISSIONS
SECTION 54 : (1) Every polling station shall have a Local Polling Commission
comprising:
Chairperson:  a personality appointed by the Head of the Divisional Branch of
Elections Cameroon.
Members:
- a representative of the Administration, appointed by the Subdivisional
Officer;
- a representative of each candidate, list of candidates or political party.
  (2) The names of representatives of the Administr ation and
candidates, lists of candidates or political parties chosen from among electors
registered in the electoral register of the polling  station concerned shall be
notified to the Council Branch of Elections Cameroo n, no later than the sixth
day before the election day.
  (3) The composition of each Local Polling Commiss ion shall be
approved by a decision of the Head of the Divisiona l Branch of Elections
Cameroon.
SECTION 55
: During vote counting, the Chairperson of the Loca l Polling
Commission shall appoint 4 (four) electors from among electors registered on
the electoral register of the polling station to serve as scrutineers.
SECTION 56 : Where one or more representatives of candidates, lists of
candidates or political parties is/are absent at th e opening of the poll, the
Chairperson of the Local Polling Commission must, b y decision recorded in
the report, fill up such vacancies in the Commissio n by appointing electors
whose names feature in the electoral register of th e polling station and who
can read and write English or French.
SECTION 57
:  (1) At least 3 (three) members of the Local Poll ing
Commission must be present at the polling station o r its immediate vicinity
throughout   polling.
  (2) However, where the Chairperson finds it absol utely impossible
to form the Local Polling Commission, they may open  the polling station at
the time fixed for the commencement of the poll. Th e Chairperson shall
mention in their
 report the time when Commissioners were appointed a nd
assumed duty.

[Page 20]
 20
SECTION 58 : Representatives of candidates, lists of candidates  or
political parties who, for no valid reasons, are no t present at the time of
commencement of polling and have been replaced by t he Chairperson under
the conditions specified in Sections 56 and 57 abov e, shall not be entitled to
sit on the Local Polling Commission.
SECTION 59
: Every candidate, list of candidates or political party may
appoint 3 (three) polling agents for each Subdivisi on who shall have free
access to all the polling stations of the Subdivisi on. Such agents may be
expelled from a polling station only if they cause a breach of the peace. Such
expulsion shall be recorded in the report. The agen ts may make comments
on the conduct of the poll to the Local Polling Com mission. Such comments
shall be recorded in the report.
SECTION 60
: (1) The Chairperson of the Local Polling Commissi on shall
alone be responsible for maintaining law and order at the polling station.
  (2) They shall order the expulsion from the polli ng station of any
person who is not an elector registered under the p olling station, with the
exception of candidates, heads of administrative un its within whose territorial
jurisdiction the station is situated and their representatives.
  (3) They shall prohibit anyone from obstructing t he polling station.
They may requisition the forces of law and order to restore order in the polling
station or to cause the station to be vacated.
  (4) No elector may be allowed to enter the pollin g station if they
are carrying any weapon whatsoever.
SECTION 61
: (1) The Local Polling Commission shall rule on an y difficulties
relating to the organization and conduct of the pol l and vote counting. In case
of a tie, the President shall have the casting vote.
  (2) Where the decision of the Local Polling Commi ssion is
impugned either, by a Commissioner , an elector aff ected, a candidate, or an
agent of a list of candidates or political party, m ention of such decision, the
reasons therefore and the dispute shall be made in the report.
SECTION 62 : (1) The Local Polling Commission shall prepare a re port on all
polling operations. The said report shall be signed  by the Chairperson and
members present and forwarded to the Head of the Di visional Branch of
Elections Cameroon.
  (2) The Head of the Council Branch  of Elections Cameroon shall,
within 48 (forty-eight) hours of the close of polli ng operations, forward a copy
of the reports of Local Polling Commissions and app ended  documents to the
Divisional Supervisory Commission or the Council Su pervisory Commission,
if need be.

[Page 21]
 21
  (3) The Divisional Supervisory Commission shall, within
72 (seventy-two) hours, forward the report of its p roceedings to the National
Commission for the Final Counting of Votes.

III - DIVISIONAL SUPERVISORY COMMISSIONS
SECTION 63 : A Divisional Supervisory Commission shall be set u p in each
Division and shall be responsible for ensuring the smooth conduct of
election preparations and election operations prope r. To this end, the
Divisional Supervisory Commission shall:
- supervise operations for drawing up, keeping and revising electoral
registers;
- examine all protests  or claims relating to electoral registers or voter
cards;
- supervise the distribution of voter cards;
- authorize any corrections it deems necessary after examining protests
or claims against the decisions of the competent commissions relating
to the electoral register or voter cards;
- centralize and check returning operations carried out by Local Polling
Commissions and documents relating thereto. In case of a minor
irregularity, it may request immediate regularization by members of the
Local Polling Commission.
SECTION 64 : (1) The Divisional Supervisory Commission, whose se at shall
be the chief-town of the Division, shall comprise:
Chairperson:   the President of the High Court with territorial jurisdiction .
Members:
- 3 (three) representatives of the Administration, appointed by the Senior
Divisional Officer;
- 3 (three) representatives of Elections Cameroon, appointed by the
Head of the Divisional Branch of Elections Cameroon;
-  a representative of each candidate.
   (2) The composition of the Divisional Supervisor y Commission
shall be approved by decision of the Head of the Re gional Branch of
Elections Cameroon.
  (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub-section  (1) above, the
Divisional Supervisory Commission shall be presided  over by a Judicial
/Legal Officer appointed by the President of the Court of Appeal with territorial
jurisdiction where there is no High Court in the Di vision, or where the
President of the said High Court is unavoidably absent, as the case may be.

[Page 22]
 22
  (4) The defaulting member may, by simple notifica tion
to the Chairperson of the Divisional Supervisory Co mmission, be replaced by
the authority or candidate who appointed them.
SECTION 65 : (1) The list of members of the Divisional Superviso ry
Commission shall be kept permanently at the Registr y of the High Court, at
the Senior Divisional Office, and at the Divisional  Branch of Elections
Cameroon.
  (2) It may be consulted by any elector of the con stituency.
SECTION 66
: The duties of Chairman and of member of the Divis ional
Supervisory Commission shall be honorary.
SECTION 67
: (1) The proceedings of the Divisional Supervisory C ommission
shall be conducted on the basis of reports forwarde d by officials of Council
Branches of Elections Cameroon.
  (2) In case of miscalculation, the Divisional Sup ervisory
Commission may correct the corresponding reports. H owever, it shall not
cancel them. In case of rectification or adjustment , the Divisional Supervisory
Commission must explain its decision and mention it in its report.
  (3) The deliberations of the Divisional Superviso ry Commission
shall be recorded in reports signed by the Chairper son and commissioners
present. Copies of this report shall be established  according to the members
present plus two. Each signatory of the report shall receive a copy.  The copy
held by the representatives of ELECAM shall be the authentic text.
  (4) A copy of the said report shall be forwarded to the General
Directorate of Elections.

IV - THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE FINAL

COUNTING OF VOTES
SECTION 68 : (1) A National Commission for the Final Counting of  Votes is
hereby set up. It shall be composed as follows:
Chairperson : a member of the Constitutional Council, appointed b y the
President of the Constitutional Council;
Members :
- 2 (two) Judicial Officers appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court;

[Page 23]
 23

- 5 (five) representatives of the Administration, appointed by the Minister
in charge of territorial administration;
- 5 (five) representatives of Elections Cameroon, appointed by the
Director General of Elections;
- 1 (one) representative of each candidate or political party taking part in
the election, appointed by the candidate or his political party.
  (2) The composition of the National Commission fo r the Final
Counting of Votes shall be approved by a resolution of the Electoral Board.
  (3) The list of members of the National Commissio n shall be
notified to the Constitutional Council and made available to the public.
SECTION 69 : (1) The National Commission for the Final Countin g of Votes
shall carry out the final counting of votes, on the  basis of reports and
appended documents submitted by Divisional Supervisory Commissions.
  (2) It shall correct any clerical errors in the c ounting of votes.
However, it shall not cancel the corresponding reports.
  (3) The final counting of votes shall be public a nd shall take place
at the seat of the Constitutional Council.
  (4) The National Commission for the Final Countin g of Votes shall
draw up a report on all its operations. This report , copies of which are
established according to the members, shall be sign ed by the Chairperson
and Commissioners present.  A copy of this report s hall be given to each
signatory member.  A copy with appended documents s hall be forwarded
within 5 (five) days to the Constitutional Council.

CHAPTER III

ELECTORAL REGISTERS
I - DRAWING UP OF ELECTORAL REGISTERS
SECTION 70 : (1) Electoral registers shall be drawn up and kept  in every
Council. An electoral register shall also be drawn up for each polling station.
  (2) The electoral registers shall be drawn up in alphabetical order.
  (3) Every newly registered elector shall be issue d a receipt
bearing the date, place and registration number.

[Page 24]
 24
  (4) The receipt referred to in subsection (3) abo ve shall be used
only for lodging complaints relating to voter regis tration operations and may
not, for any reason whatsoever, be used in place of the voter card.
  (5) The register shall contain the full name, dat e and place of
birth, occupation, residence or place of abode of every elector.
SECTION 71 : Entry on the electoral register shall be a right. It shall be
carried out by the branches of Elections Cameroon, in collaboration with the
relevant joint commissions.
SECTION 72:
 (1) The electoral register shall bear the names of  all registered
electors who have been residing in the council for at least 6 (six) months.
  (2) The electoral register shall further contain the names of
electors who have been registered under the provisi ons of Section 46 of this
law.
  (3) Such registration shall not be carried out au tomatically. It shall
be done only at the express request of the elector who shall first adduce
evidence that their name does not appear on any other electoral register.

SECTION 73
: (1) No person may have their name entered on more  than one
electoral register or several times on the same register.
  (2) Where an elector is registered several times on the same
register, only one registration shall be valid. Suc h elector shall be
automatically struck off the other registers.
  (3) Where an elector is registered on several reg isters, only the
last registration shall be valid, save otherwise re quested by the elector. They

shall be automatically struck off the other registers.
  (4) Any refusal to register an elector must be ju stified and notified
to the elector concerned. Such refusal may be dispu ted or challenged before
the Divisional Supervisory Commission or the Electo ral Board as the case
may be.

II - ANNUAL REVISION OF ELECTORAL REGISTERS

Section 74 : (1) Electoral registers shall be permanent. They s hall be revised
every year throughout the national territory.
  (2) The annual revision of the electoral register s shall commence
on 1 January and end on 31 August of every year.

[Page 25]
 25
SECTION 75  (1) The Director General of Elections may, after
obtaining the assent of the Electoral Board, order by decision, a thorough
recompilation of the registers at the time of annual revision.
  (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 74  (2) and 75 (1)
above, annual revision or, where applicable, the re compilation of electoral
registers shall be suspended from the date of convening the electors.
  (3) In case of recompilation of electoral registe rs, the Director
General of Elections may extend the period provided  for in Section 74 (2)
above by no more than 3 (three) months.
 (4) During the period of the revision of electoral  registers,
applications for expunging names or for modification shall be submitted to the
commissions provided for under Section 52 above. Su ch commissions shall
carry out the corresponding operations.
SECTION 76 : (1) In case of recompilation, entirely new elector al registers
shall be drawn.
  (2) During the period of revision, the following persons shall be
entered in the electoral register:
- citizens who meet the conditions laid down by law;
- citizens whose names were previously omitted.
   (3) The commission shall expunge from the regist er the names of:
- deceased persons;
- persons ordered to be struck off the register by the competent judicial
authority;
- persons who no longer meet the conditions laid down by law;
- persons found to have been wrongfully registered.
  (4) Modifications shall be made to the electoral register following
any change of residence or clerical errors noticed especially regarding the full
name, parentage, date and place of birth of electors.
SECTION 77
: (1) Operations to enter electors, expunge electors’  names and
make adjustments on the electoral register shall be  carried out on the
registers and forms provided for that purpose by Elections Cameroon.
  (2) The registers referred to in Section 77 (1) a bove shall be kept
and preserved at Council Branches of Elections Came roon. Such registers
may be consulted by any person who so desires.

[Page 26]
 26
  (3) During the period of revision of electoral re gisters, any
citizen whose name has been omitted from the electoral register may apply to
be entered on the register.
SECTION 78
: (1)  The Chairperson of the Commission charged with the
Revision of Electoral registers shall forward the r eport of the proceedings of
the said Commission to the Divisional Branch of Elections Cameroon, no later
than 5 September. All documents relating to deletio n of names and
modifications shall be appended to such report.
  (2) After keying in, carrying out technical check s and drawing up
the provisional electoral register of the Division,  the Head of the Divisional
Branch of Elections Cameroon shall forward the corr esponding electoral
registers to the Council Branches concerned for pos ting up no later than 20
October.
  (3) Once the provisional electoral registers are published, any
political party or elector may refer any irregulari ties or omissions noted to the
Revision Commission or, where necessary, the Divisi onal Supervisory
Commission.
SECTION 79
: (1) The Commission charged with the Revision of El ectoral
registers shall forward a report on any corrections  made on the provisional
registers to the Divisional Branch of Elections Cam eroon, no later than 10
November.
  (2) Following the drawing up of the revised elect oral register for
the Division, the Divisional Branch of Elections Ca meroon shall forward the
said register to the Director General of Elections,  through the Regional
Branch, no later than 10 December.
SECTION 80
: At the end of the revision exercise, and based on the
documents and data provided by the Regional Branche s of Elections
Cameroon, the Director General of Elections shall d raw up and publish the
national electoral register, no later than 30 December.
SECTION 81 : (1) The Director General of Elections shall be res ponsible for
keeping the national electoral register.
  (2) Any political party, elector or representativ e of a political party
or candidate may petition the Electoral Board for a ny case in particular of
omission, error or multiple entry of an elector on the national electoral
register.
  (3) Where the petition is rejected, the person co ncerned may file
an appeal to the Court of Appeal with territorial j urisdiction over Elections
Cameroon, which shall give a final ruling, free of charge and with no particular
procedure, within 5 (five) days of the filing of the appeal.

[Page 27]
 27

III - REGISTRATION OUTSIDE REVISION PERIODS
SECTION 82 : (1) The following persons may be entered on the ele ctoral
register outside revision periods, without any resi dence requirements and
where such changes lead to a change of residence:
(a) Civil Servants and State employees who have been either transferred
or placed on retirement after the closing  date for registration, as well as any
members of their families who are living with them on the date of such
transfer or retirement;
(b) Servicemen who have been demobilized after the expiry of the time
limit for registration;
  (2) The provisions of Section 82(1) (a) above sha ll also apply to
private sector employees who have been either transferred or placed on
retirement.
  (3) Applications for entry on electoral registers  outside the revision
period shall be supported by all relevant information and filed with the Council
Branch of Elections Cameroon.
SECTION 83
: (1) Applications shall be examined by the (Council)
Commission charged with the Revision of Electoral r egisters within a period
of 9 (nine) days, and no later than 6 (six) days be fore polling day. The
decisions of the Commission shall be notified forth with to the parties
concerned.
 (2) The Commission shall enter the name of the ele ctor in the
electoral register and in the addendum which shall be published no later than
4 (four) days before the polling day.

CHAPTER IV

VOTER CARDS
SECTION 84 : (1) Every elector whose name has been entered on an
electoral register shall be issued a biometric voter card which shall bear
their full name, date and place of birth, parentage , photograph, finger
prints, occupation, domicile or residence.
  (2) Voter cards shall be permanent.

[Page 28]
 28
  (3) Where voter cards are renewed or new names ar e entered
on the electoral register, the cards shall be distr ibuted within a period of 40
(forty) days before the polling day.
SECTION 85
: (1) The distribution of voter cards shall be carried out under the
supervision of the Commission referred to in Section 53 of this law.
  (2) Voter cards not delivered to their legal hold ers shall be left at
the polling station where such holders are registered and shall remain at their
disposal until the close of the poll.
  (3) Such cards shall be delivered to the legal ho lders only upon
the production of the identity card of each holder or the receipt referred to in
Section 70 above.
  (4) In every polling station, at the close of the  poll, the
Commission shall count the unclaimed cards, stamp a nd place them in a
sealed packet which it shall take to the Council Br anch of Elections
Cameroon with the election report specifying the number of such cards.

CHAPTER V

CONVENING THE ELECTORS
SECTION 86 : (1) Electors shall be convened by decree of the Pre sident of
the Republic.
  (2) No less than 90 (ninety) days shall elapse be tween the date of
publication of the convening decree and the day of election.
  (3) Polling shall take place on a Sunday or a day  declared a public
holiday and shall last a single day.
  (4)The decree convening electors shall specify th e time of
opening and closing of polling stations.

CHAPTER VI

ELECTION CAMPAIGN
SECTION 87 : (1) The election campaign shall open on the 15 th  (fifteenth) day
preceding the election and close at midnight on the eve of the election day.
  (2) Candidates may prepare circulars, manifestos or posters, at
their own expense or that of the party presenting their candidatures.

[Page 29]
 29

  (3) Such circulars, manifestos or posters shall b e in the colour
chosen for the candidate or party. They shall bear the initials chosen for
printing the ballot papers.
  (4) The maximum size of the posters prepared for the election
campaign shall be determined by decision of the Director General of
Elections.
SECTION 88
: (1) The General Directorate of Elections shall, fo r every
candidate, party or list of candidates running in the election, print a number of
ballot papers equivalent to the number of electors registered, plus one quarter
thereof, as well as campaign ballot papers.
  (2) The size of ballot papers shall be determined  by decision of
the General Directorate of Elections, after consult ation with the Electoral
Board.
SECTION 89
: (1) Such circulars, manifestoes and posters signe d by the
representative of the list, candidate or political party shall be submitted in
duplicate to Elections Cameroon for prior endorsement.
  (2) A copy of such circular, manifesto and poster  shall be filed and
the other copy, carrying the endorsement, shall be handed back to the
candidate or to the representative of the candidate , list or political party. The
printed document shall make mention of the endorsement.
  (3) The endorsement shall be withheld where a doc ument is
tantamount to a call to violence or undermines nati onal territorial integrity, the
Republican form of the State, State sovereignty, na tional unity or incites
hatred against a State official or a citizen or a body of citizens.
  (4) The endorsement shall indicate the colour and  initials assigned
to each candidate or political party.
SECTION 90
: Any document published and circulated in contrave ntion of the
provisions of Sections 87, 88 and 89 shall, at the instance of Elections
Cameroon, be seized by the Administrative Authoriti es without prejudice to
such criminal prosecution as may be instituted agai nst the authors of such
documents and the disseminators thereof.
SECTION 91
: (1) At the instance of Elections Cameroon, Counci l authorities
shall make available to every candidate or list of candidates space for the
display of posters and other campaign material.

[Page 30]
 30
  (2) No public display of posters in relation to t he election,
albeit stamped, shall be allowed outside the author ized spaces, whether by
candidates or by any other person or group.
  (3) This prohibition shall equally apply to poste rs or notices
displayed in a place open to the public or on priva te premises if they are not
displayed by the owner of the premises.
  (4) It is prohibited for candidates, lists of can didates or political
parties to post up their campaign material on panel s reserved for other
candidates, lists of candidates or political parties.
  (5) Elections Cameroon shall order any posters un lawfully
displayed to be removed.
SECTION 92
: (1) It is forbidden for any one to circulate or c ause the
circulation of any ballot papers, circulars, docume nts, articles or objects
related to the election in any way whatsoever, on election day.
  (2) Any document or other articles circulated in violation of the
provisions of Section 92 (1) above shall, at the be hest of Elections
Cameroon, be seized by the Administrative Authoriti es without prejudice to
such criminal prosecution as may be instituted against the offenders.
SECTION 93 : (1) During the election campaign period, the poli tical parties
running, or candidates or their representatives may  organize meetings to
explain and present electoral platforms and manifestoes to electors.
  (2) For the purposes of Section 93 (1) above, the  representative of
each list or any other agent of each political part y or candidate intending to
hold election meetings shall submit the meeting sch edule to the
administrative authorities and the branches of Elec tions Cameroon so that
steps can be taken to ensure the maintenance of law and order.
  (3) In the absence of a meeting schedule, any pub lic meeting
organized as part of the election campaign must be declared with the
Administrative Authorities and the branches of Elec tions Cameroon at least
24 (twenty-four) hours in advance, indicating the t ime and venue of the
meeting.
SECTION 94
: (1) Where public law and order are seriously thre atened, the
administrative authority may, by order, prohibit any such meeting(s).
  (2) In such case, the administrative authority sh all agree with the
organizers on a new date or, where necessary, venue  to enable them to hold
such meeting(s). It shall inform the competent bran ches of Elections
Cameroon of such arrangements.

[Page 31]
 31
SECTION 95 : (1) Unless otherwise authorized by the competent
administrative authorities with territorial jurisdiction, meetings may not be held
on the public highway.
  (2) The administrative authority may, having rega rd to local
conditions, fix by order the hour after which no meeting may continue.

CHAPTER VII

THE POLL
I - POLLING STATIONS
 SECTION 96: (1) The Director General of Elections shall draw up  the list of
polling stations for every council.
  (2) Such list shall specify the area covered by e ach polling station.
  (3) There shall be one polling station for a maxi mum of 500 (five
hundred) electors.
  (4) Every polling station shall be located in pub lic premises or in
premises open to the public.
SECTION 97
: The list of polling stations shall be forwarded to  Council
Branches of Elections Cameroon for posting up at le ast 8 (eight) days before
the day of election.

II - CONDUCT OF THE POLL

Section 98:  (1) Every polling station shall have the lists of v oters eligible to
vote. One of such registers shall be used for electors to enter their signatures.
One list shall be posted up at the polling station.
  (2) Every polling station shall have the necessar y election material
for the conduct of the poll.
SECTION 99:
 (1) The Chairperson of the Local Polling Commissio n shall, at
the start of polling, take note of the time of opening of the poll which they  shall
mention in the polling report.
  (2) Before the first elector casts their
 vote, the Chairperson of the
Local Polling Commission shall publicly open the ballot box to ascertain that it
is empty and has no opening, then lock it under the  control of the other

[Page 32]
 32
members of the polling station and, where applicabl e, in the presence of
any other accredited person.
SECTION 100:
 (1) The election shall be by secret ballot. Uniform and opaque
envelopes shall be used in voting.
  (2) In every polling station, the number of ballo t papers of each
candidate or list of candidates as well as envelope s must be more than the
number of registered voters.
SECTION 101
: (1) Any voter whose name is duly entered in the el ectoral
register shall be entitled to vote.
  (2) However, the right to vote shall be suspended f or whoever is
remanded in custody or is detained after conviction by a criminal court.
SECTION 102: (1) No person shall be allowed to vote unless the ir name
appears on the electoral register of the polling station concerned.
  (2) The provisions of Section 102 (1) above notwi thstanding, the
Chairperson and members of the Local Polling Commis sion shall be allowed
to vote in the polling station upon producing their voter’s cards.
  (3) In case of appeal by an elector, any decision  by the competent
court ordering registration, as evidenced by an Ord er, shall be tantamount to
registration of the said elector on the electoral register concerned.
Section 103 : (1) On entering the polling station, the elector shall produce
their voter’s card. They shall also prove their ide ntity by producing their
national identity card.
  (2) The Local Polling Commission may allow any el ector
registered in the polling station whom, for one rea son or the other, may be
unable to produce their voter’s card. The Commissio n shall first check the
elector’s identity as provided for in Section 103 (1) above.
SECTION 104
: (1) After having been identified, every elector sh all  themself
take an envelope and each of the ballot papers plac ed at their  disposal, and
compulsorily enter the polling booth where they shall make their choice.
  (2) They shall come out of the polling booth and,  after satisfying
the Commission that they hold a single envelope onl y, shall place such
envelope in the ballot-box.
  (3) The polling booth shall be set up in such man ner as to ensure
secrecy of the ballot.

[Page 33]
 33
SECTION 105: (1) Any elector suffering an infirmity or whose
physical state makes them unable to carry out on th eir own, any of the
operations described in Sections 103 and 104 above,  may enlist the
assistance of an elector of their choice.
  (2) The elector chosen must be registered on the electoral register
of the polling station concerned and shall not be a candidate or representative
of a candidate, list of candidates or political par ty. They may not assist more
than one elector on polling day.
SECTION 106
: (1) The fact that an elector has voted shall be evidenced by
affixing the elector’s signature and finger print u sing indelible ink on the
relevant column of the electoral register.
(2) Where the elector is unable to sign, the fact t hat such elector has voted
shall be evidenced by affixing the elector’s finger  print using indelible ink on
the relevant column of the electoral register.
SECTION 107
: Initialled copies of the electoral register shall be kept by the
Council Branch of Elections Cameroon. In case of di spute, such initialled
copies shall be forwarded to the Constitutional Cou ncil for consultation or to
the competent administrative court, at its instance.

III - COUNTING OF THE VOTES
SECTION 108: (1) Once the time set for the close of polls is u p, the
Chairperson of the Local Polling Commission shall declare the close of polls.
  (2) No elector who arrives after the close of pol ls may be allowed
to vote.
  (3) However, any elector who, at the time of clos ing the polls is
within the premises of the polling station or who has been waiting to enter the
polling station shall be allowed to vote. The repor t of the Commission shall
mention the time when voting actually ended.
SECTION 109
: Vote counting and tallying shall take place in ea ch polling
station immediately after the actual end of voting,  in the presence of voters
who so desire provided the hall can contain them wi thout obstructing the
counting operation.
SECTION 110
: (1) However, where public peace so warrant, the
Chairperson of the Local Polling Commission shall s eal the ballot box, under
the supervision of members of the Local Polling Com mission and the forces
of law and order.

[Page 34]
 34
  (2) The Chairperson shall thereupon, accompanied by the
members of the Commission, take the ballot-box to t he Council Branch of
Elections Cameroon.
  (3) The opening of the ballot-box and envelopes a nd the counting
of votes shall be carried out in the presence of th e head of the Council
Branch of Elections Cameroon, or their representati ve and members of the
Local Polling Commission.
SECTION 111
: (1) Envelopes shall be checked and opened by members of
the Local Polling Commission assisted by appointed scrutineers.

  (2) The names of the appointed scrutineers shall be entered in the
report of each Local Polling Commission.
SECTION 112
: (1) The vote counting procedure shall be as follows:
a) The ballot box shall be opened and the number of  envelopes contained
therein checked;
b) One of the scrutineers shall take the ballot pap er out of each envelope,
unfold it and hand it to another scrutineer who sha ll read  it aloud; the
name of the candidate or list of candidates, or the choice “YES” or “NO”
in case of referendum, appearing on the ballot pape r shall be recorded
by two scrutineers on specially prepared counting s heets. Where an
envelope contains several ballot papers, such ballo t papers shall be
invalid if they are different; they shall count as one vote if they are
identical.
  (2) The result of counting shall not take into ac count:
• Any ballot paper bearing any signs, marks or signa ture by which the
elector may be identified;
• Ballot papers contained in envelopes bearing signs  of a similar nature
or in envelopes other than those officially made available to electors;
• Any ballot paper other than officially printed bal lot papers.
  (3) Ballot papers so declared invalid and, where applicable,
envelopes containing such ballot papers shall be at tached to the report which
shall mention the number of such invalid ballot pap ers. Ballot papers found in
the ballot box without any envelope and envelopes found empty shall likewise
be regarded as invalid and mentioned in the report.  Counting sheets shall be
attached to the report.
SECTION 113
: Once counting is over, the results obtained in ea ch polling
station shall be proclaimed.

[Page 35]
 35
SECTION 114: Any objections which may be raised by electors at
the time of vote counting shall be decided upon by the Local Polling
Commission and shall be recorded in the report.
SECTION 115
: (1)  The results of the poll shall forthwith be entered into a
report. Such report, which shall be made in as many  copies as there are
members plus 2 (two), shall be closed and signed by all the members.
  (2) A copy of the report shall be handed to each member of the
Local Polling Commission present and having signed it.
  (3) The Chairperson of the Local Polling Commissi on shall
forward the original copy of the report to the Head  of the Council Branch of
Elections Cameroon for filing. The said original copy shall be authentic.
  (4) A copy of the report shall be forwarded, with in 48 (forty-eight)
hours following the close of the poll, to the Chair person of the Divisional
Supervisory Commission or to the Chairperson of the  Council Supervisory
Commission, where necessary.

PART IV
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO VACANCY OF AND
ELECTION TO THE PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC

CHAPTER I
TERM OF OFFICE AND POLLING
Section 116: (1) The President of the Republic shall be elected for a term
of office of 7 (seven) years by universal suffrage and by direct, equal and
secret ballot.
  (2) He shall be eligible for re-election.
  (3) He shall be elected by a single-round majorit y ballot. Voting
shall take place no less than 20 (twenty) days and no more than 50 (fifty)
days before the expiry of the term of office of the  incumbent President of the
Republic.
  (4) The candidate having obtained the majority of  the votes cast
shall be declared elected.

[Page 36]
 36

CHAPTER II
ELIGIBILITY AND INCOMPATIBILITIES
SECTION 117:   (1) Candidates for the office of President of t he Republic
must be in full possession of their civic and polit ical rights and must be aged
35 (thirty-five) years and above by the date of election.
  (2) They shall be Cameroonian citizens by birth a nd show proof of
having resided in Cameroon for an uninterrupted period of at least 12 (twelve)
months and of having their names entered in the electoral register by the date
of election.
 SECTION 118
: (1) All persons who, by their own doing, have
placed themselves in a situation of dependence on or connivance
with a foreign person, organization or power or foreign State shall
not be eligible.
(2)  Ineligibility shall be established by the Constitu tional Council within
3 (three) days of referral to it, at the behest of any concerned person or the
Legal Department.
SECTION 119
: The office of President of the Republic shall be
incompatible with any other public elective office or professional activity.

CHAPTER III
NOMINATION   OF   CANDIDATES
SECTION 120 :  Any candidate wishing to stand for presidential elections
shall declare their candidature through a declarati on bearing their
authenticated signature.
SECTION 121(1)
:  A candidate may be:
  (a)  Either put forward by a political party;
  (b) Or independent, on condition that they are pu t forward by at
least 300 (three hundred) dignitaries hailing from all the Regions, with 30
signatures from each Region. Persons who qualify to append such signatures
shall be either Members of Parliament or of Trades Chambers, or Regional
Councillors, Municipal Councillors, or First-Class Chiefs.
 (2) The candidate nominated by a political party n ot represented at
the National Assembly, the Senate, in a Regional Co uncil or in a Municipal

[Page 37]
 37
Council should also fulfil the conditions laid out under Section
121(1)(b) above applicable to independent candidates.
The said dignitaries shall affix to a candidate’s p apers their signatures
authenticated by the administrative authorities wit h territorial competence.
Each dignitary may affix their signature only once and for a single candidate.
SECTION 122: (1) The candidacy papers shall bear the following
information:
- The full name, date and place of birth, occupation and residence of the
candidate;
- The colour, emblem and title chosen for printing ballot papers.
  (2) The candidacy papers shall be accompanied by:
(a)  The list of the 300 signatures of dignitaries as required under Section
121 above, where applicable;
(b)   A certified copy of the candidate’s birth certificate, no more than 3
(three) months old;
(c)  The presentation and nomination papers submitted by the party
sponsoring the candidate, where applicable;
(d)   A declaration whereby the candidate undertakes, on honour, to abide
by the Constitution;
(e)   A certificate of non-conviction (Criminal record form No.3), no more
than 3 (three) months old;
(f)  A tax or no-tax certificate;
(g)   A certificate of nationality;
(h)  The original copy of a certificate showing payment of the deposit.
   (3) It shall be forbidden to choose an emblem be aring all the 3
(three) colours, namely GREEN, RED and YELLOW.
SECTION 123
: (1) Candidacy papers shall be submitted in duplicat e,
within 10 (ten) days of the date of convening of electors.
  (2) Candidacy papers shall be submitted to the Ge neral
Directorate of Elections. They may also be submitte d to the Regional
Branches of Elections Cameroon, which shall forward them within 24 (twenty-
four) hours to the General Directorate of Elections.
  (3) A copy thereof shall be forwarded forthwith t o the
Constitutional Council by the candidate or his repr esentative, against an
acknowledgement of receipt.
  (4) Candidacy papers may further be delivered by registered mail
with acknowledgement of receipt, which shall be add ressed to the General
Directorate of Elections with a copy sent to the Co nstitutional Council,

[Page 38]
 38
provided that such registered letter is received wi thin the time-limit provided
for in Sub-section (1) above.
  (5) Where candidacy papers are submitted, a provi sional receipt
shall be issued. Where they are forwarded by regist ered mail, the
acknowledgement of receipt shall stand in lieu thereof.
SECTION 124
: (1) Each candidate shall pay a deposit of CFA 30 00 0 000
(Thirty million) francs into the Treasury.
  (2) The Treasury Services shall then issue a cert ificate, in
triplicate, showing payment of the deposit referred  to in Sub-section (1)
above. One of the copies of the certificate shall b e forwarded forthwith by the
Treasury Services to the Constitutional Council. Th e original and the other
copy shall be handed over to the candidate.
SECTION 125
: (1) The Electoral Board may accept or reject a candidacy.
  (2) The Director General of Elections shall notif y the person
concerned of the reasoned decision to reject their candidacy. A copy of the
said decision shall be forwarded forthwith to the Constitutional Council.
  (3) The decision to reject a candidacy or to publ ish candidacies
may be appealed against before the Constitutional C ouncil under the
conditions laid down in Sections 128, 129, and 130 below.
SECTION 126: Within no less than 60 (sixty) days to the date of  the poll,
the Electoral Board shall draw up and publish the l ist of candidates. It shall
forthwith notify the Constitutional Council of such list of candidates.
SECTION 127 : (1)  Where a candidate put forward by a political party  dies
before the opening of the election campaign, such candidate may be replaced
on the initiative of the said political party.
  (2) The replacement referred to in Sub-section (1 ) above may be
possible only where fresh candidacy papers are subm itted to the General
Directorate of Elections no later than the 20
th  day preceding the day of
election.
  (3) Independent candidates may not be replaced.
SECTION 128
: (1) Where a candidate put forward by a political party is
disqualified by the Constitutional Council after th e publication of the list of
candidates, they may be replaced by another candida te of the same political
party. The said candidate must fulfil the condition s of eligibility laid down by
this law.

[Page 39]
 39
  (2) Such replacement must take place within no mo re than
3 (three) days of the decision of the Constitutional Council.
SECTION 129: Objections or petitions relating to the rejection  or
acceptance of candidates, as well as those relating  to the colour, initials or
emblem adopted by a candidate may be brought before  the Constitutional
Council by any candidate or political party taking part in the election or any
person serving as a Government representative in th e said election, within a
maximum period of 2 (two) days following the public ation of the list of
candidates.
Section 130
: (1) Objections and petitions shall be filed throu gh ordinary
petitions to the Constitutional Council.
  (2) Such petitions shall not stay execution.
  (3) The petitions shall be recorded by the Consti tutional Council.
  (4) Under pain of rejection, petitions shall spec ify the alleged facts
and means.
  (5) Petitions shall be notified to all the partie s concerned through
any fast means leaving a paper trail, and posted up  at the Constitutional
Council within 24 (twenty-four) hours following the filing  thereof.
  (6) The written evidence of the person concerned shall be
deposited within 24 (twenty four) hours of the noti fication or posting up of the
petition. The Constitutional Council shall issue an  acknowledgement of
receipt thereof.
SECTION 131
: (1) In case of objections or petitions relating to the
rejection or acceptance of candidacies as well as t hose relating to the colour,
initials or emblem chosen by a candidate, the Const itutional Council, before
which the matter is brought, shall rule within no more than10 (ten) days of the
filing of the petition.
  (2) In case of a petition relating to the colour,  initials or emblem
adopted by a candidate, the Constitutional Council shall assign by priority to
each candidate their habitual colours, initials or emblem by order of seniority
of the political party which put forward the candid ate and, as concerns the
other cases, according to the date of submission of  the candidacy papers, as
evidenced by the submission receipt.
  (3) Any decision following a petition against the  rejection or
acceptance of a candidacy, as well as that relating  to the colour, initials and/
or emblem shall be notified forthwith to the Electoral Board and to the political
parties concerned.

[Page 40]
 40

CHAPTER IV
ELECTORAL DISPUTES
SECTION 132: (1) The Constitutional Council shall ensure the r egularity of
the presidential election.
(2) The Constitutional Council shall rule on all pe titions filed by
any candidate, any political party which took part in the election or any
person serving as a representative of the Administration for the election,
requesting the total or partial cancellation of election operations.
SECTION 133: (1) All petitions filed pursuant to the provision s of Section
132  above must reach the Constitutional Council within  no more than 72
(seventy two) hours of the close of the poll.
  (2) The Constitutional Council may, if it deems i t necessary, hear
any applicant or request the submission of evidence, against a receipt.
  (3) Under pain of rejection, the petition shall s pecify the alleged
facts and means. It shall be posted up within 24 (t wenty four) hours of its
submission and notified to the parties concerned wh o shall be allowed 48
(forty-eight) hours to submit their replies, against a receipt.
SECTION 134
: The Constitutional Council may, without prior adv ersarial
hearing, issue a reasoned decision to reject any pe tition it considers
inadmissible or to be based solely on objections wh ich cannot influence the
outcome of the election.
SECTION 135
: (1) In the event of cancellation of the elections , notification
thereof shall forthwith be made to the Minister of Territorial Administration and
Elections Cameroon.
  (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 86 of this law, a new
election shall be held within no less than 20 (twen ty) days and no more than
40 (forty) days of the date of cancellation.
  (3) The incumbent President of the Republic shall  remain in office
up to the election and swearing-in of the President -elect, and shall convene
the electorate within the time-limit provided for in Sub-section (2) above.
SECTION 136
: The decisions of the Constitutional Council relat ing to
elections, election results and candidatures shall be final.

[Page 41]
 41

CHAPTER V
PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS
SECTION 137: The Constitutional Council shall adopt and procla im the
results of the presidential election within no more  than15 (fifteen) days of the
close of the poll.
SECTION 138
: (1) Where, after the election, no candidate is de clared
President-elect of the Republic, the incumbent shal l remain in office until a
new President is elected and sworn in.
  (2) In such case, a new election shall be held wi thin the time-limit
provided for under Section 135 above, from the expi ry of the legal time-limit
for the proclamation of the election results.
SECTION 139
: (1) The election results shall be published accord ing to the
procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official G azette in English and
French.
  (2) The publication provided for under Sub-sectio n (1) above shall
apply to any decision by the Constitutional Council  to modify or cancel the
said results.
CHAPTER VI
OATH TAKING
SECTION 140 : (1) The President-elect shall assume office once h e or she
takes the oath within no less than15 (fifteen) days  of the proclamation of the
results by the Constitutional Council.
  (2) He shall take oath of office before the Camer oonian people in
the presence of Members of Parliament, the Constitu tional Council and the
Supreme Court meeting in solemn session in the mann er and words
prescribed hereinunder:
a. The President of the National Assembly shall administer the oath
following a short address which he shall conclude in the following
established form:
“Mr. President of the Republic,
Do you pledge yourself on your honour to faithfully  perform the duties
entrusted to you by the people, and do you solemnly  swear before God
and all men to devote all your efforts to preservin g, protecting and

[Page 42]
 42
defending the Constitution and the laws of the Repu blic of
Cameroon, to watch over the commonwealth of the Nat ion, and to
uphold and defend the unity, integrity and independ ence of the
Cameroon Fatherland?”
b. The President-elect, standing, raising his right hand and facing the
Members of Parliament, the Constitutional Council and the Supreme
Court shall pledge himself by answering:
 “I SO DO SWEAR.”
SECTION 141 : (1) Five (5) authentic original copies shall be ma de of the
oath taking, signed by the President of the Nationa l Assembly and co-signed
by the Presidents of the Senate, the Constitutional  Council and the Supreme
Court.
  (2) One of the originals of the oath-taking deed referred to in Sub-
section (1) above shall be kept at the Secretariat General of the National
Assembly, 3 (three) original copies shall be deposited with and kept as record
or minutes of the respective registries of the Sena te, the Constitutional
Council and the Supreme Court.
  (3) One original copy shall be handed over to the  President of the
Republic.

CHAPTER VII

VACANCY OF THE OFFICE OF
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
SECTION 142 : Where the Presidency of the Republic becomes vaca nt as
a result of death, resignation or permanent unavail ability ascertained by the
Constitutional Council, the powers of the interim P resident of the Republic
shall be exercised as of right until the election o f a new president by the
President of the Senate. Where the latter is also u nable to exercise the
powers, they shall be exercised by the Vice-Preside nt following the order of
precedence in the Senate.
SECTION 143
: (1) In the event of vacancy of the Office of Presi dent of the
Republic due to resignation, the resigning President shall so inform the nation
in a message.
  (2) The President of the Republic shall then tend er his resignation
to the President of the Constitutional Council, who  shall send a copy thereof
to the President of the Senate.

[Page 43]
 43
  (3) The message referred to in Sub-section (1) ab ove shall be
published according to the procedure of urgency and  inserted in the Official
Gazette in English and French.
  (4) The interim President of the Republic shall e xercise his duties
in accordance with Section 142 above.
SECTION 144
: (1)  The interim President of the Republic, that is, th e
President of the Senate or his Vice, may neither am end the Constitution nor
reshuffle the Government. He may not organize a ref erendum or be a
candidate in the Presidential election.
  (2) However, in case of necessity related to the organization of the
presidential election, the acting President of the Republic may, upon
consultation with the Constitutional Council, reshuffle the Government.
SECTION 145
: (1)  The permanent unavailability of the President of th e
Republic shall be ascertained by a majority of 2/3 (two-thirds) of the members
of the Constitutional Council.
  (2) Such unavailability shall be referred to the Constitutional
Council by the President of the National Assembly u nder the conditions laid
down by regulation.
  (3) The declaration of the vacancy of the office of President of the
Republic as duly ascertained in accordance with Sub -sections (1) and (2)
above, shall be published by the Constitutional Cou ncil according to the
procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official G azette in English and
French.
SECTION 146
: In the cases referred to in Sections 143 and 145 a bove,
the poll for the election of the new President of t he Republic must be held no
less than 20 (twenty) days and no more than 120 (on e hundred and twenty)
days of the vacancy of the office.

CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 147 : (1) The deposit shall be refunded by the Public Treasury:
• Either to the candidate who withdraws their candid acy prior to the
printing of ballot papers, upon presentation of a r eceipt of payment of
such deposit and a certificate of withdrawal of can didacy duly
established by the Director General of Elections; or

[Page 44]
 44

• To the elected candidate or candidate who obtained  at least 10% of
valid votes cast. In such case, the deposit shall b e refunded upon
presentation of a certificate of valid votes cast, issued by the
Constitutional Council and having the value of a payment order; or
  (2) In cases other than those specified above, th e deposit shall
remain in the Treasury.

PART V
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO THE ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT

CHAPTER I
TERM OF OFFICE AND POLLING

SECTION 148.-
 (1) Members of Parliament shall be elected for a t erm of 5 (five)
years by universal suffrage and direct and secret ballot.

                           (2) They shall be eligible for re-election.

                          (3) All the seats in the National Assembly shall be renewed
every 5 (five) years. Elections shall be held not l ater than 40 (forty) days to the
expiry of the term of office of Members of Parliament.

                              (4) The term of offic e of Members of Parliament shall
commence on the day of the session held as of right following the election.

                              (5) The National Asse mbly shall meet as of right in ordinary
session on the second Tuesday following the proclam ation of results of the
election of Members of Parliament by the Constitutional Council.

SECTION 149
.- (1) The division shall constitute an electoral constituency.

                         (2) However, certain electoral constituencies could be warded on
the grounds of their peculiar situation by a decree  of the President of the
Republic.

SECTION 150
.-(1) The National Assembly shall have 180 (one hun dred and
eighty) members.

                        (2) A decree by the President of the Republic shall fix the number
of members representing each constituency.

[Page 45]
 45

SECTION 151
.-(1) Voting shall be for a list of candidates with out voters
indicating any preference of candidates nor transfe rring candidates from one list
to another.

                       (2) Each political party exi sting legally and willing to take part in
the election in a constituency shall submit a compl ete list having the same
number of candidates chosen from its members as the seats to be filled.

                      (3) Each list shall take into  consideration the various sociological
components of the constituency concerned. It shall also take into consideration
gender aspects.

SECTION 152
.-(1) Members of Parliament shall be elected throug h a mixed
single round ballot, comprising a majority system a nd a proportional
representation system.

                        (2) However, in constituenc ies having only one seat, there shall
be a majority uninominal voting for a single candidate.

                         (3) After the ballot:

(a) In single member constituencies, the candidate with a majority of the
votes cast shall be declared elected ; should there  be a tie, the eldest
candidate shall be declared elected ;

(b) In constituencies where the list system is applicable :
- the list that obtains an absolute majority of the  votes cast shall win all
the seats available;
- if no list obtains an absolute majority of the votes cast, the seats shall be
shared as follows:
* the list with the highest number of votes shall b e allocated half of the
seats rounded off, if need be, to the nearest whole  number above ;
where there is a tie between 2 (two) or more lists,  the number of seats
rounded off to the nearest whole number above shall  be allocated to the
list with the highest average age;
* the remaining seats shall be allocated to the oth er lists through the
application of proportional representation to the l ists with the highest
votes ; where there is a tie in the number of votes , the seat(s) shall be
allocated to the list with the highest average age.

                           (4) Lists which obtain l ess than 5 % of the votes cast in the
constituency concerned shall not be eligible for th e proportional distribution of
seats.

[Page 46]
 46

                          (5) Seats shall be alloca ted to candidates in the order in which
they appear on each list.

SECTION 153
.- For every seat to be filled, there shall be a substantive candidate
and an alternate candidate, both of whom shall go b efore the electorate at the
same time.

SECTION 154
.- After their election, and in all cases of vacanc y other than the
death of the substantive member, the alternate shall take the seat of the Member
of Parliament at the National Assembly until the expiry of the latter’s term.

SECTION 155
.- (1) Where one or more seats become vacant in a c onstituency
either because of the death, resignation of the sub stantive or alternate member,
or for any other reason, by-elections shall be held  within a period of 12 (twelve)
months following the occurrence of the vacancy.

                        (2) By-elections shall be h eld in the electoral constituency in the
manner specified in Sections 153 and 154 above.

                      (3) Where a seat becomes defi nitively vacant in an electoral
constituency with many seats, there shall be a single ballot.

                     (4) Only political parties that took part in the general elections in the
constituency shall be allowed to take part in the by-elections.

                   (5) No by-election shall be held  if the vacancy occurs less than a
year before the end of the legislative period.

CHAPTER II
QUALIFICATION OF CANDIDATES

SECTION 156 .- Any Cameroonian citizen, of either sex, who enjo ys the right to
vote and is entered on electoral registers, is aged  23 (twenty-three) years at the
date of the election and can read and write English  or French can be nominated
as a candidate for election to the National Assembly.

SECTION 157
.- Any lien who has acquired Cameroonian nationalit y by way of
naturalization shall be eligible only after a presc ription period of 10 (ten) years,
with effect from the date of acquisition of such nationality.

SECTION 158
.- (1) No person shall be eligible for election where, by virtue of his
own act, he has placed himself in a position of dependency on an alien, a foreign
organization, power or State or is an intelligence agent thereof.

[Page 47]
 47

                        (2) On application of the r elevant government service or any
interested person(s), such ineligibility shall be e stablished by the Constitutional
Council.

SECTION 159
.- (1) All persons serving in defence and territori al security
services, especially in the security and police for ces, and members of the armed
forces and the like shall likewise be ineligible an d may not stand for election to
the National Assembly during the discharge of their  duties and during the 6 (six)
months following the termination of their service b y resignation, dismissal,
transfer or by any other manner.

                       (2) Such ineligibility shall  apply, under the same conditions, to
persons who are performing or have performed the du ties referred to in sub-
section (1) above for a period of at least 6 (six) months, even if they are not or
had not been on the regular strength.

SECTION 160
.-(1) Public servants elected to the office of Memb er of Parliament
shall, as of right, be seconded to the National Ass embly for the whole term of
their office.

                      (2) For State employees gover ned by the Labour Code, their
employment contract shall be suspended for their whole term of office.

SECTION 161
.-  (1) Every member and every alternate shall meet  the conditions
for eligibility throughout their term of office.

                           (2) The seat in the Nati onal Assembly of a member or of an
alternate shall automatically become vacant if, aft er the proclamation of the
results of election, it is established that such me mber or alternate was
ineligible or if during his/her term of office s/he  is no longer eligible for
membership under the conditions laid down in this law.

                        (3) The seat of a Member of  Parliament shall be declared vacant
by the Constitutional Council, at the behest of the  Bureau of the National
Assembly. That of the alternate member shall be automatic.

                       (4) Where a Member of Parlia ment is convicted and declared
ineligible after an election, the Constitutional Co uncil shall establish such
vacancy.

[Page 48]
 48

CHAPTER III
INCOMPATIBILITIES

SECTION 162 .- (1) The office of Member of Parliament shall be incompatible
with the office of member of Government or of persons ranking as such, member
of the Constitutional Council and of member of the Economic and Social Council.

                       (2) The office of Member of Parliament shall further be
incompatible with the office of Senator, mayor, gov ernment delegate to a city
council, president of a regional council, with any other non-elective public office
and with the duties of president of a consular chamber, board chairperson or with
the status of wage earner in a public establishment  or public and semi-public
enterprise.

SECTION 163
.-(1) The occupation of one of the posts referred t o in Section 162
above shall render the parliamentary seat vacant.

                       (2) No Member of Parliament shall cause or allow his name to be
followed by any reference to his capacity as Parlia mentarian in any
advertisement concerning a financial, industrial or commercial undertaking.

CHAPTER IV
NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES

SECTION 164 .- (1) Candidatures shall, within 15 (fifteen) days  from the
convening of the electorate, be made out in nominat ion paper in triplicate,
bearing the legalized signature of candidates.

                   (2) Such nomination paper shall be submitted and registered,
against a receipt, at the General Directorate of El ections or at the divisional
branch of Elections Cameroon of the constituency co ncerned. A copy thereof
shall immediately be sent to the Constitutional Cou ncil by the candidate or his
representative, against acknowledgement of receipt.

                        (3) Nomination papers submi tted at the divisional branch of
Elections Cameroon shall be sent forthwith to the G eneral Directorate of
Elections.

              (4) The nomination paper shall contai n the following particulars:

(a) the full name, date and place of birth, filiati ons, occupation and
residence of candidates;
(b) the name of the list and the political party sponsoring such list;

[Page 49]
 49

(c) the symbol selected for the purpose of printing  ballot papers or of
identifying the party;
(d) the name of the representative, whether he is a  candidate or not, and
the address of his residence;
(e) evidence of representation of sociological comp onents of the
constituency in drawing up the list;
(f) evidence of consideration of gender in drawing up the list.

                  (5) Any emblem comprising all of the following 3 (three) colours:
green, red and yellow shall be forbidden.

SECTION 165
.-  The nomination paper shall include for each can didate,
substantive or alternate:

(a)  a copy of his birth certificate, not more than 3 (three) months old;
(b)  a certificate of nationality ;
(c)  a criminal record (Bulletin No. 3), not more than three months old;
(d)  a declaration by which the substantive or alte rnate candidate testifies,
on his honour, that his name appears only on that l ist and that he is not
the object of any of the disqualifications provided for by this law;
(e)  a tax certificate or a tax exemption certificate;
(f)  an attestation of registration on electoral registers ;
(g)  the original receipt of payment of deposit ;
(h)  an attestation by which the political party sp onsors the person as
candidate.

SECTION 166
.- (1) The substantive candidate and his alternate shall both pay a
deposit into the State Treasury in the amount of 3 000 000 (three million) CFA
francs, according to the form and terms of Section 124(2) of this law.

                        (2) The deposit shall be re funded by the State Treasury in the
cases provided for by Section 147 of this law.

SECTION 167
.- The provisions of Sections 125, 126, 127, 128, 1 29, 130 and
131 of this law relating to the nomination of candi dates, disputes and complaints
in respect of rejection or acceptance of candidatur es as well as those on colour,
initials or emblem chosen by a candidate or list of  candidates shall be applicable
to the election of Members of Parliament.

[Page 50]
 50

CHAPTER V
ELECTORAL DISPUTES AND PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS

SECTION 168 .- (1) The Constitutional Council shall ensure the regularity of the
election of Members of Parliament. It shall proclaim the results within a maximum
period of 20 (twenty) days with effect from the date of closure of polls.

                        (2) Electoral disputes and organization of a new election, as the
case may be, shall be carried out in pursuance of t he provisions of Sections 132
to 136 of this law.

                       (3) The report on the conduc t of electoral operations and
proclamation of results shall be prepared by the Co nstitutional Council in four
copies. It shall file the original copy and forward  the other copies to the Ministry
in charge of territorial administration, the Nation al Assembly and the Electoral
Board.

PART VI
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO THE ELECTION
 OF MUNICIPAL COUNCILLORS

CHAPTER I
TERM OF OFFICE AND POLLING

SECTION 169 .- (1) (1) Municipal councillors shall be elected for a term of 5 (five)
years by universal suffrage and direct and secret ballot.

                          (2) They shall be eligible for re-election.

         (3) The election shall take place 20 (twen ty) days before the
expiry of the term of office of municipal councillors.

                        (4) The term of office of m unicipal councillors shall commence on
the day of the first session held as of right follo wing the proclamation of the
results of the election. The said session shall hol d on the second Tuesday
following the proclamation of results.

SECTION 170
.-  (1) All the seats of municipal councillors shal l be renewed every
5 (five) years at the same date.

                          (2) However, if need be, the President of the Republic may, by
decree, extend or abridge the term of office of mun icipal councillors for a period

[Page 51]
 51
not exceeding 18 (eighteen) months, after consultat ion with the Government
and the Bureau of the Senate.

SECTION 171.
- (1) Voting shall be for a list of candidates with out voters
indicating any preference of candidates nor transfe rring candidates from one list
to another.
                          (2) Each council shall constitute an electoral constituency.

                         (3) Each list shall take into consideration:
-  the various sociological components of the constituency concerned;
- gender aspects.

SECTION 172
.- (1) Municipal councillors shall be elected throu gh a mixed single
round ballot, comprising a majority system and a pr oportional representation
system.

                         (2) After the ballot :

a) the list that obtains an absolute majority of th e votes cast shall win all
the seats available ;
b) if no list obtains an absolute majority of the votes cast, the seats shall be
shared as follows:
- the list with the highest number of votes shall b e allocated half of the seats
rounded off, if need be, to the nearest whole numbe r above ; where there
is a tie between 2 (two) or more lists, the number of seats rounded off to
the nearest whole number above shall be allocated t o the list with the
highest average age;
- the remaining seats shall be allocated to the oth er lists, including the list
with a relative majority, through the application o f proportional
representation to the lists with the highest votes ; where there is a tie in the
number of votes, the seat(s) shall be allocated to the list with the highest
average age.

                      (3) Lists which obtain less t han 5% of the votes cast in the
constituency concerned shall not be eligible for th e proportional distribution of
seats.

                     (4) Seats shall be allocated t o candidates in the order in which they
appear on each list.

SECTION 173
.- (1) The number of municipal councillors shall be fixed as follows:

- councils with less than 50 000 ( fifty thousand) inhabitants: 25 (twenty-five)
councillors;

[Page 52]
 52

- councils with from 50 000 (fifty thousand) to 100  000 (one hundred
thousand) inhabitants : 31 (thirty-one) councillors;
- councils with from 100 001 (one hundred thousand and one) to 200 000
(two hundred thousand) inhabitants: 35 (thirty-five) councillors;
- councils with from 200 001 (two hundred thousand and one) to 300 000
(three hundred thousand) inhabitants: 41 (forty-one) councillors;
- councils with more than 300 000 (three hundred th ousand) inhabitants: 61
(sixty-one) councillors.

                       (2) A decree of the Presiden t of the Republic shall fix the number
of municipal councillors by council, on the basis o f the official population census
immediately preceding the municipal elections.

SECTION 174
.-(1) By-elections shall be held where a municipal council loses at
least two-fifths of its members. In such case, only  political parties that submitted
a list of candidates for the general municipal elec tions shall be allowed to submit
an additional list of candidates.

                     (2) No by-election shall be he ld if the vacancy referred to in sub-
section (1) above occurs less than a year before th e end of the term of office of
municipal councillors.

CHAPTER II
QUALIFICATION OF CANDIDATES AND INCOMPATIBILITIES

SECTION 175 .- (1) Any Cameroonian citizen, of either sex, who enjoys the right
to vote, is entered on electoral registers, is aged  23 (twenty-three) years at the
date of the election, can read and write English or  French and shows proof of
effective residence of at least 6 (six) months with in the area of the council
concerned can be nominated as a candidate for municipal elections.

                        (2) Persons not resident wi thin the area of the council concerned
may stand for municipal elections if they have a place of abode therein.

     (3)  Any alien who has acquired Cameroonian nationality by way of
naturalization shall be eligible only after a presc ription period of 10 (ten) years,
with effect from the date of acquisition of such nationality.

SECTION 176 .- (1)  No person shall be eligible for election if, by vir tue of his own
act, he has placed himself in a position of depende ncy on an alien, a foreign
organization, power or State or is an intelligence agent thereof.

[Page 53]
 53

  (2) On application of the relevant government service o r any
interested person(s), such ineligibility shall be e stablished by the competent
administrative court within 3 (three) days following referral of the matter.

SECTION 177
.- (1)  All persons serving in defence and territorial secu rity
services, especially in the security and police for ces, and members of the armed
forces and the like shall likewise be ineligible an d may not stand for election to
the office of municipal councillor during the disch arge of their duties and during
the 6 (six) months following the termination of the ir service by resignation,
dismissal, transfer or by any other manner .

   (2)  Such ineligibility shall apply, under the same cond itions, to
persons who are performing or have performed the du ties referred to in sub-
section (1) above for a period of at least 6 (six) months, even if they are not or
had not been on the regular strength .

SECTION 178.- (1) The seat of a municipal councillor shall automatically become
vacant if, after the proclamation of the results of  election, it is established that
such councillor was ineligible or if during his/her  term of office s/he is no longer
eligible for membership under the conditions laid down in this law.

                         (2) The vacancy shall be d eclared, after a deliberation of the
municipal council, by an order of the Minister in c harge of local and regional
authorities. The said order may be challenged befor e the competent
administrative court.

SECTION 179
.- (1) The office of Governor, Secretary-General an d Inspector-
General at the governor’s office, Senior Divisional  Officer, Sub-Divisional and
their deputies shall be incompatible during the ten ure of such office with the
office of municipal councillor.

                        (2) The office of municipal  councillor shall likewise be
incompatible with the following positions:

- police officer, gendarme, serviceman, prison admi nistration officer and
persons ranking as such;
- secretary-general of a council, municipal revenue  collector and municipal
service head;
- legal and judicial officer.

SECTION 180
.- (1) A municipal councillor who, subsequent to election, becomes
ineligible for office as provided by this law, shal l have to opt for his municipal
office or the function concerned. Where no choice i s made known within 15

[Page 54]
 54
(fifteen) days following accession to the said func tion, he shall be considered
to have resigned by an order of the Minister in cha rge of local and regional
authorities.

        (2) No candidate shall be on more than 1 (o ne) list, nor be
member of more than 1 (one) municipal council.

CHAPTER III
NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES

SECTION 181 .- (1) Candidatures shall, within 15 (fifteen) days  from the
convening of the electorate, be made out in nomination paper in 3 (three) copies,
bearing the legalized signature of candidates and submitted at the council branch
of Elections Cameroon against a receipt.

                           (2) The nomination paper shall contain the following particulars:

(a)  the full name, date and place of birth, filiat ion and occupation of
candidates;
(b)  the name of the list and the political party sponsoring such list;
(c)  the symbol selected for the purpose of printin g ballot papers or of
identifying the party;
(d)  the name of the representative of the list, whether he is a candidate or not,
and the address of his residence;
(e)  evidence of representation of sociological components of the constituency
in drawing up the list;
(f) evidence of consideration of gender aspects in drawing up the list .

                       (3) Any emblem comprising al l of the following 3 (three) colours :
green, red and yellow shall be forbidden.

SECTION 182
.- The nomination paper shall include for each candidate :

(a)  a copy of his birth certificate, not more than 3 (three) months old;
(b)  a certificate of nationality ;
(c)  a criminal record (Bulletin No 3), not more than three months old;
(d)  a declaration by which the candidate testifies, on his honour, that his name
appears only on that list and that he is not the ob ject of any of the
disqualifications provided for by this law;
(e)  a tax certificate or a tax exemption certificate;
(f) an attestation of registration on electoral registers ;
(g)  an attestation of abode or residence in the co uncil concerned, issued by
the competent administrative authority;

[Page 55]
 55

(h)  the original receipt of payment of deposit ;
(i) an attestation by which the political party spo nsors the person as
candidate.

SECTION 183
.-  Each candidate shall pay a deposit of 50 000 (f ifty thousand)
CFA francs into the Public Treasury. A certificate of payment of the deposit shall
be issued by the treasury services in three copies.

SECTION 184
.- The following shall be rejected :

- incomplete lists;
- lists not containing the documents and items refe rred to in this law ;
- lists including candidates who are not members of  the party concerned.

SECTION 185
.- (1) The council branch of Elections Cameroon sha ll, within 5
(five) days following the submission, ensure that t he list of candidates conforms
with the provisions of this law.

                             (2) In any case, it sh all, within the time limit referred to in sub-
section (1) above, forward to the Director-General of Elections all nomination
papers received, including any observations.

SECTION 186
.- After submission of lists no withdrawal of candi dates or
modification of the nomination of candidates shall be allowed.

SECTION 187
.- The Electoral Board shall draw up and publish th e lists of
candidates at least 60 (sixty) days before the date of the poll.

SECTION 188
.- If a candidate whose name appears on a list dies  or is
disqualified, he may be replaced, not later than 30  (thirty) days to the opening of
the poll by another candidate, in accordance with t he procedure for the
nomination of candidates.

SECTION 189
.- (1) The decision to accept or reject a list of c andidates may be
challenged before the competent administrative cour t by a candidate, the
representative of the list concerned or of any othe r list or by an elector whose
name appear on the electoral register of the council concerned.

                           (2) Disputes or complaints shall be filed by simple petition within
5 (five) days following the publication of lists of candidates.

SECTION 190
.- (1) The competent administrative court shall rul e within 5 (five)
days following the filing of the petition.

[Page 56]
 56

                          (2) The decision of the c ompetent administrative court shall be
notified immediately to the Electoral Board of Elec tions Cameroon for
enforcement and to the other parties concerned.

CHAPTER IV
COUNTING OF VOTES AND
 PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS

SECTION 191
.- (1) A council supervisory commission shall be se t up in each
council, composed as follows :

Chairperon  : a personality appointed by the Director-General of Elections.

Members  :

- 3 (three) representatives of the administration, appointed by the Senior
Divisional Officer;
- 1 (one) representative of each political party ta king part in the polls;
- 3 (three) representatives of Elections Cameroon, appointed by the
Director-General of Elections.

                       (2) The composition of Counc il Supervisory Commissions shall be
established by the Director-General of Elections.

SECTION 192
.- The Council Supervisory Commission shall be resp onsible for
the centralization, verification of vote counts, on  the basis of reports and
documents forwarded by local polling commissions. I t shall, as the case may be,
correct, review or cancel the said reports.

SECTION 193
.- (1) The Council Supervisory Commission shall pro claim the
results of municipal elections in the electoral con stituency concerned within 72
(seventy-two) hours following the close of the polls.

                             (2) The proceedings of  the Council Supervisory Commission
shall be minuted in a report signed by all commissi on members present.  Each
signatory member shall receive a copy.

                            (3) A copy of the said report shall be forwarded to the Senior
Divisional Officer of the jurisdiction for on-ward transmission to the Minister in
charge of local and regional authorities. Another c opy shall be sent to the
General Directorate of Elections.

[Page 57]
 57

CHAPTER V
ELECTORAL DISPUTES

SECTION 194.- (1) Any elector, candidate or person acting in t he capacity of a
government election officer may petition for the ca ncellation of elections in the
council concerned before the competent administrative court.

                         (2) Disputes shall be a si mple petition filed within 5 (five) days
following the proclamation of results by the Council Supervisory Commission.

                        (3) The competent administr ative court shall give a ruling within
40 (forty) days from the day the petition was filed.

SECTION 195
.- (1) The municipal councillor whose election is c hallenged shall
remain in office until a final decision is issued.

                          (2) Where all or part of the election is finally cancelled, by-
elections shall be held within 60 (sixty) days following the cancellation.

                        (3) Only the lists of candi dates submitted during the general
municipal elections shall be allowed to take part in the by-elections.

CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SECTION 196.- (1) The deposit shall be returned to the candidate:

- who is declared ineligible before the printing of ballot papers;
- whose candidature is definitively disqualified ;
- whose list obtained at least 5% of votes cast in the council concerned. In
this case, the copy of the results proclamation rep ort issued by the
Council Supervisory Commission shall entail order to pay.

(2) The deposit referred to in sub-section (1) abov e may subsequently be
collected by the representative of the candidate or list of candidates.

         (3) In all cases other than those mentione d in sub-section (1) above, the
deposit shall be retained by the Public Treasury.

[Page 58]
 58

PART VII
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO REFERENDUMS

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

SECTION 197 .- The President of the Republic may, after consult ing with the
President of the Constitutional Council, the Presid ent of the National Assembly
and the President of the Senate, submit to a refere ndum any reform bill which,
although normally reserved to the legislative power , could have profound
repercussions on the future of the Nation and national institutions.

 This shall apply in particular to:

- bills to organize public authorities or to amend the Constitution;
- bills to ratify international agreements or treatie s having particularly
important consequences;
- certain reform bills relating to laws on persons and property.

SECTION 198
.- The bill submitted to a referendum shall be appe nded to the
decree to convene electors. The said bill shall be widely disseminated.

SECTION 199
.- The bill submitted to a referendum shall be adop ted by a
majority of votes cast.

SECTION 200
.- The provisions of Sections 197 and 198 above sha ll equally
apply to bills and private members’ bills on the am endment of the Constitution
submitted to a referendum.

CHAPTER II
REFERENDUM CAMPAIGN

SECTION 201 .- The provisions of Sections 87 to 95 above shall be applicable to
the referendum campaign, subject to those of this Chapter.

SECTION 202
.- (1) The following may apply to take part in the referendum
campaign:

- political parties represented at the National Ass embly and/or the
Senate;

[Page 59]
 59

- political parties which obtained at least 5% of v otes cast in at least
one constituency during the last election of Members of Parliament
and/or Senators.

 (2) The application referred to in sub-section (1) above shall indicate:

- the full address of the political party;
- the full name and domicile of the legal represent ative of the
political party;
- the “YES” or “NO” vote on the bill submitted to t he referendum.

SECTION 203
.- (1) Applications to take part in the referendum campaign shall
bear the legalized signature of the legal represent ative of the political party and
must be submitted together with the original of the  receipt for payment into the
Public Treasury of a deposit fixed at 1 000 000 (one million) CFA francs.

                       (2)  Applications shall be s ubmitted in 2 (two) copies to the
General Directorate of Elections Cameroon within 15  (fifteen) days following the
convening of electors. A copy of the application sh all be forwarded immediately
to the Constitutional Council by the legal represen tative of the party against
acknowledgement of receipt.

SECTION 204
.- (1) The Electoral Board may accept or reject any  application to
take part in the referendum campaign. The legal rep resentative of the party shall
be notified of a reasoned decision to accept or rej ect an application. This
decision shall be minuted in a report which shall b e forwarded immediately to the
Constitutional Council.

                         (2) An appeal may be lodge d before the Constitutional Council
against the decision to reject or accept an applica tion, in accordance with the
conditions and time limits fixed in Sections 132, 133 and 134 of this law.

CHAPTER III

REFERENDUM OPERATIONS

SECTION 205.- The ballot papers made available to voters shall be of different
colours and respectively bear, in identical characters, the words “YES” or “NO”.

SECTION 206
.- Voters shall cast “YES” for or “NO” against the bill submitted to
the referendum.

SECTION 207
.- The other referendum operations shall be conduct ed in
accordance with Sections 98 to 107 of this law.

[Page 60]
 60

SECTION 208
.- The provisions of Sections 68 and 69 of this law  shall apply for
the counting of votes.

CHAPTER IV
REFERENDUM DISPUTES

SECTION 209 - (1) The Constitutional Council shall ensure the r egularity of
referendums.

                            (2) It shall examine an d give final ruling on all referendum
complaints and disputes.

SECTION 210
.- Any complaint relating to the regularity of a re ferendum may be
referred to the Constitutional Council by the Presi dent of the Republic, the
President of the National Assembly, the President o f the Senate, one-third of
Members the National Assembly or one-third of Senators, in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 133 and 134 above.

SECTION 211
.- Where the Constitutional Council has established  the existence
of irregularities in the conduct of the referendum,  it may, considering the gravity
of such irregularities, maintain the results or dec lare them wholly or partly null
and void.

CHAPTER V
PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS

SECTION 212.- (1) The Constitutional Council shall proclaim re ferendum results
within 15 (fifteen) days following the date of closing of the poll.

                           (2) It shall prepare a r eport on the results in two copies, file the
original and forward the other copy to the President of the Republic.

SECTION 213
.- (1) The referendum bill shall be adopted where, at the end of the
referendum, “YES” carries the majority of the valid votes cast.

                        (2) The President of the Re public shall enact the law adopted
within 15 (fifteen) days following the transmission  of the results proclamation
report.

                      (3) The law shall be preceded by the following:

“The Cameroonian people have adopted by referendum of…….., the
President of the Republic hereby enacts the law set forth below”.

[Page 61]
 61

PART VIII
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE ELECTION OF SENATORS

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

SECTION 214.- (1) Each Region shall be represented in the Sena te by 10 (ten)
senators, 7 (seven) of whom shall be elected by ind irect universal suffrage on a
regional basis and 3 (three) appointed by decree of  the President of the
Republic.

                          (2) Senators shall serve a term of 5 (five) years.

                          (3) Senators shall be eligible for re-election.

                          (4) The term of the appointed senators shall be renewable.

SECTION 215
.-(1) The term of senators shall commence on the da y of the
ordinary session following the election, being the expiry date of the term of the
incumbent senators.

                       (2) The Senate shall meet as  of right in ordinary session on the
third Tuesday following the proclamation of the res ults of senatorial elections by
the Constitutional Council.

                     (3) The decree specified under  Section 214 (1) above shall be
published within 10 (ten) days following the procla mation of results by the
Constitutional Council.

SECTION 216
.-(1) The entire Senate shall be renewed every 5 (five) years.

                           (2) Senatorial elections  shall be held no later than 40 (forty)
days to the expiry of the current term of office.

CHAPTER II
POLLING

SECTION 217- (1) Each Region shall make up a constituency.

                        (2) Senatorial elections sh all be by list system, with no changing
of the serial order of candidate's names or vote splitting.

[Page 62]
 62
SECTION 218 .- (1) Senatorial elections shall be a mixed single  ballot,
comprising a majority system and a proportionate representation system.

                         (2) Every political party taking part in the election shall present a
full list of 7 (seven) candidates selected from among its members. For each seat,
there shall be a substantive candidate and his alte rnate, both of whom shall
appear before the Electoral College at the same time.

                        (3) The composition of each list must reflect:
-  the various sociological components of the Region;
-  gender aspects.

                        (4) Where a list obtains an  absolute majority of the votes cast, it
shall be declared the winner of the elections, filling all 7 (seven) seats.

                       (5) Where no list obtains an  absolute majority of the vote cast, the
list with a relative majority shall be awarded half  of the seats to be filled rounded
up to the next whole number, that is, 4 (four) seats.

                      (6) In case of a tie among wi nning lists, the 4 (four) seats shall be
shared equally among the said lists; where applicab le, the remaining seat shall
be awarded to the list with the highest age average.

                    (7) After the sharing of the se ats as stipulated in sub-sections (4),
(5) and (6) above, the remaining 3 (three) seats sh all be shared amongst all the
lists, including those that obtained a relative maj ority in proportionate
representation, following the highest remainder rule. List with less than 5% of the
votes cast in the Region shall be excluded from the sharing.

                  (8) Seats shall be awarded to can didates in the order in which they
appear on each list.

              (9) Where several lists have the same  average for the award of the last
seat, the seat shall be awarded to the list having obtained the highest number of
votes. Where there is a tie in the number of votes obtained, the seat shall be
awarded to the eldest candidate.

SECTION 219
.- (1) In case of death of an elected Senator and i n compliance
with the provisions of Section 155 above, by-elections shall be held in the Region
concerned.

                         (2) By-elections shall be held under the conditions stipulated in
Section 218 above. However, where there is only one  vacant seat to be filled, a
single ballot uninominal majority election shall be held.

                       (3) In case of death of an a ppointed Senator, at the behest of the
President of the Senate, a new Senator shall be appointed to complete his term.

[Page 63]
 63

CHAPTER III
QUALIFICATION OF CANDIDATES
 AND INCOMPATIBILITIES

SECTION 220 .- (1) Candidates for the office of Senator, as wel l as the
personalities appointed to the said office must have reached the age of 40 (forty)
by the date of election or appointment.

                           (2) The candidate must be of Cameroonian nationality and must
provide evidence of effective residence in the territory of the Region concerned.

SECTION 221
.- The other qualifications of candidates and incom patibilities shall
be the same as those fixed under Sections 156 to 163 above.

CHAPTER IV
ELECTORAL COLLEGE

SECTION 222 .- (1) Senators shall be elected in each Region by an electoral
college comprising regional and municipal councillors.

                         (2) Regional and municipal  councillors whose election is
contested shall exercise their voting right, pending a final ruling by the competent
court.

CHAPTER V
ELECTORAL REGISTERS

SECTION 223 - (1) In each Region, a list of senatorial electors  comprising
regional and municipal councillors shall be drawn up and updated by the regional
branch of Elections Cameroon.

                       (2) The list shall feature i n alphabetical order, each elector's full
name, date and place of birth, type of elective off ice, profession and domicile or
place of residence.

SECTION 224
.- (1) On publication of the decree convening the Electoral College,
the list of senatorial electors shall be updated

                        (2) The updated list of sen atorial electors shall, where applicable,
show the additions and deletions resulting notably from death, loss of voting

[Page 64]
 64
rights, by-elections and various cases of ineligibi lity and disqualification for
membership as provided by law.

                      (3) The updated list of senat orial electors shall be published at
least 30 (thirty) days before the voting date. It m ay be copied or notified to any
person on request.

CHAPTER VI
VOTER CARDS

SECTION 225 .- (1) Senatorial electors shall each receive a reg istration card
which must feature their full name, date and place of birth, photograph, finger
prints, type of elective office, filiation, profession, domicile or place of residence.

             (2) The abovementioned registration ca rds shall be used only during
senatorial elections.

SECTION 226
.-(1) Registration cards shall be distributed by th e divisional
branches of Elections Cameroon, within the 20 (twen ty) days preceding the
elections.

                        (2) Cards not distributed s hall remain at the disposal of their
holders until the close of the poll at the divisional branch of Elections Cameroon.

CHAPTER VII
POLLING STATIONS

SECTION 227 - (1) Voting shall be conducted in the headquarters  of each
division.

        (2) Members of the electoral college, under  pain of loss of their
voting right, shall be bound to take part in the polls.

(3) However, where unavoidably absent, a member of the electoral
college may issue a proxy to another member. No mem ber of the electoral
college shall have more than one proxy.

                  (4) The State shall defray the co sts relating to the participation of
members of the Electoral College in the polls, in a ccordance with the conditions
laid down by regulation.

SECTION 228
.- The Director-General of Elections shall fix the list of polling
stations as well as the distribution of electors within the said stations.

[Page 65]
 65
SECTION 229 .- The table of the list of polling stations and of  the distribution
of senatorial electors shall be posted at the divis ional branches of Elections
Cameroon at least 15 (fifteen) days before the voting.

CHAPTER VIII
CONVENING THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE
 AND NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES

SECTION 230 .- In view of the election of Senators, the elector al college shall be
convened by the President of the Republic at least 45 (forty-five) days before the
date of the poll, in accordance with the provisions of Section 86 above.

SECTION 231
.- The nomination of candidates for the election of  senators shall
be conducted  pursuant to Sections 164 and 167 of this law.

CHAPTER IX
ELECTORAL CAMPAIGN

SECTION 232.- The provisions of Sections 87 and 95  of this la w shall apply to
the campaign for the election of Senators.

CHAPTER X
ELECTION OPERATIONS

SECTION 233 .- Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, elect ion operations
shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 95 and 115 of this law.

SECTION 234
.- (1) Polling results for the election of Senators  in each polling
station shall be minuted in a report.

                        (2) The report, drafted in two copies plus one, shall be signed by
the President and all members of the polling statio n present.  A copy is given to
each signatory member.

                       (3) The two copies shall be forwarded to the regional branch of
Elections Cameroon. Invalid ballots, envelopes cont aining contested ballot
papers, tally sheets signed by each of the supervis ors as well as any other
relevant documents on the conduct of the election s hall be appended to the said
report.

[Page 66]
 66
                (4) A copy of the report shall be f iled at the regional branch of
Elections Cameroon. The other copy shall be forward ed to the regional
supervisory commission, at the behest of the said r egional branch of Elections
Cameroon.

CHAPTER XI
COUNTING OF VOTES

SECTION 235.- (1)  A regional supervisory commission shall be set up in each
Region as follows:

Chairperson :  a magistrate of the Court of Appeal, designated by the President
of the Court of Appeal of the jurisdiction;

Members :

- 3 (three) representatives of the Administration, de signated by the
Governor;
- 1 (one) representative of each political party taking part in the election ;
- 3 (three) representatives of Elections Cameroon, de signated by the
Chairperson of the Electoral Board.
(2) The composition of the regional supervisory com mittee shall be
established by the Chairperson of the Electoral Board.

SECTION 236.
 (1) The list of members of the regional supervisory  commission
shall be kept permanently at the regional branch of Elections Cameroon.

                             (2) It may be consulted by any elector of the constituency.

SECTION 237
. (1) The regional supervisory commission shall cen tralize, ensure
the counting and verification of vote-counting oper ations, on the basis of reports
forwarded by polling stations.

                           (2) The regional supervi sory commission shall not undertake to
cancel the reports referred to in sub-section (1) above.

(3) However, in case of a computing error or wrong data, it may review the
said reports. In this case, it shall be bound to re ason its decision and state such
reasons in its report.

                         (4) The regional superviso ry commission shall mention in its
report all cases of inconsistency or doubt on the fairness of election operations. It
shall forward such report, together with its observ ations, to the national final vote
counting commission.

[Page 67]
 67

SECTION 238
.- The counting of votes at national level shall be  conducted in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 68 and 6 9 of this law, subject to the
replacement of divisional supervisory branches by t he regional supervisory
branches.

CHAPTER XII
ELECTORAL DISPUTES AND
PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS

SECTION 239.-(1) The Constitutional Council shall ensure the r egularity of the
election of senators.

                        (2) Senatorial elections di sputes shall be settled in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 133 and 136 of this law.

SECTION 240
.- (1) The Constitutional Council shall proclaim th e results of the
election of senators within 15 (fifteen) days following the close of the poll.

                        (2) The report on the condu ct of elections and proclamation of
results shall be prepared by the Constitutional Cou ncil in four copies. It shall file
the original and send the 3 (three) other copies to  the Senate, the Ministry in
charge of local and regional authorities and the Electoral Board, respectively.

                      (3) The results of the electi on shall be published according to the
procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official Gazette in English and French.

CHAPTER XIII
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 241
.- The deposit paid by candidates for the election of  Senators shall
be refunded under the conditions fixed in Section 147 of this law.

SECTION 242
.- Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 222 (1) above, where
the Senate is put in place before Regions, the elec toral college for senatorial
elections shall exclusively comprise municipal councillors.

[Page 68]
 68

PART IX
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE ELECTION
OF REGIONAL COUNCILLORS

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

SECTION 243
.- (1) Regional councillors shall be:

- Delegates of divisions elected by indirect univer sal suffrage ;
- Representatives of traditional rulers elected by their peers.

                         (2) The term of office of regional councillors shall be 5 (five)
years. They shall be eligible for re-election.

SECTION 244.
- Elected regional councillors shall meet as of rig ht in ordinary
session of the Regional Council on the second Tuesd ay following the
proclamation of election results by the regional supervisory commissions.

SECTION 245
.- (1) All the seats in the regional councils shall  be renewed every
5 (five) years. Elections shall be held not later than 20 (twenty) days to the expiry
of the term of office of regional councillors.

                          (2) In all the regions, e lectoral colleges shall be convened the
same day, according to the conditions and deadlines  fixed under Section 230 of
this law.

SECTION 246
.- (1) The regional council shall reflect:
-  the various sociological components of the regio n;
-  gender aspects.

                       (2) The number, proportion p er category and allowances of
regional councillors shall be fixed by a separate law.

SECTION 247
.-(1) Each division shall constitute a constituency for the election of
regional councillors.

                             (2) However, certain e lectoral constituencies could be warded
on the grounds of their peculiar situation by a dec ree of the President of the
Republic.

[Page 69]
 69

CHAPTER II
POLLING

SECTION 248 .- (1) Delegates of divisions shall be elected by a n electoral
college comprising municipal councillors.

                          (2) Representatives of tr aditional rulers shall be elected by an
electoral college composed of 1
st , 2 nd  and 3 rd  degree indigenous traditional rulers
whose designation has been approved in accordance with the regulation in force.

                         (3) Traditional rulers hol ding the office of municipal councillor
shall cast their vote in only one electoral college.

SECTION 249
.- Conditions for the composition of the electoral colleges provided
for in Section 248 (1) and (2) above shall be fixed by regulation.

SECTION 250
.- (1) Delegates of divisions shall be elected thro ugh a mixed
single round ballot, comprising a majority system a nd a proportional
representation system.

                         (2) The vote for represent atives of traditional rulers shall be of a
single candidate majority system.

                        (3) Notwithstanding the pro visions of sub-sections (1) and (2)
above, the vote shall be for a single candidate whe re there is only one seat for
the division or, as the case may be, in a constitue ncy, as a result of the warding
provided for under Section 247(2) above.

CHAPTER III
QUALIFICATION OF CANDIDATES
AND INCOMPATIBILITIES

SECTION 251 .- (1) No person may stand for election into a regi onal council
unless effectively resident in the region concerned.

                         (2) However, non-residents  of a region may stand for election
into a regional council if they are domiciled withi n the territory of the region
concerned.

SECTION 252
.- The qualification of candidates provided for und er Sections 175
to 180 above shall be applicable to the election of regional councillors.

SECTION 253
.-(1) Heads of administrative units and/or their as sistants may not
stand for election into regional councils during their tenure of office.

[Page 70]
 70

                       (2) The incompatibility cite d in sub-section (1) above shall be
equally applicable, under the same conditions and during their tenure to:

- police, gendarmerie and prison administration off icials;
- regional administration officials and employees;
- servicemen and servicewomen;
- judicial and legal officers;
- civil servants and public employees having to tak e cognizance of the
finances or accounts of the region concerned.

                     (3) The incompatibility provid ed for in sub-sections (1) and (2)
above shall remain in force for a period of one yea r following the end of their
tenure of office.

SECTION 254
.-(1) Any regional councillor found to be in any of  the positions of
incompatibility stipulated under Section 253 (1) an d (2) above, shall be bound,
within no more than 1 (one) month to opt for his el ective office or for his current
office.

                       (2) The councillor concerned  shall, through any written means,
inform the State representative in his region of hi s choice. The latter shall inform
the President of the regional council thereof.

                     (3) Where a regional councillo r fails to make a choice, as provided
for under sub-sections  (1) and (2) above, he shall  be automatically declared to
have resigned from his office, by order of the Mini ster in charge of regional and
local authorities.

SECTION 255
.- (1) Any regional councillor who, for reasons pre vious to his
election, finds himself in a situation of ineligibi lity and/or incompatibility provided
for under this law shall be declared to have resigned automatically by an order of
the Minister in charge of local and regional authorities.

                          (2) The provisions of sub -section (1) above shall equally be
applicable to any regional councillor deemed ineligible.

                        (3) The order provided for in sub-section (1) above may be
challenged before the competent administrative court.

                       (4) Where a regional council lor is declared to have resigned
automatically following a final penal sentence lead ing to the loss of his civic and
voting rights, the petition referred to in sub-sect ion (3) shall not have a
suspensory effect.

[Page 71]
 71

SECTION 256
.- No person may stand for election on more than on e list or be
member of more than one regional council.

SECTION 257
.- The provisions of Sections 181 and 190 above sha ll be
applicable to the nomination of candidates in view of the election of regional
councillors, subject to the replacement of the coun cil branch by the divisional
branch of Elections Cameroon.

CHAPTER IV
PREPARING THE POLLS

SECTION 258.- (1) The divisional branch of Elections Cameroon shall draw up
an electoral list comprising members of the 2 (two) electoral colleges provided for
under Section 248 above.

                           (2) The list of members of the electoral colleges shall be
updated, approved and published within 15 (fifteen) days following the convening
of the electoral colleges.

                          (3) Members of the electo ral college composed of
representatives of traditional rulers must be domic iled within the territory of the
subdivision concerned.

                        (4) Registration cards shal l be distributed within the time limit
provided for under Section 226 above.

SECTION 259
.- (1) Any decision to accept or reject a candidatu re or list of
candidates may be challenged by the candidate conce rned, any representative
of a list concerned and/or any other list, and any other member of the electoral
college.

                         (2) The petition shall be lodged with the competent administrative
court, within no more than 5 (five) days of the not ification of the rejection or
acceptance decision.

                       (3) The court referred to un der sub-section (2) above shall give a
ruling within 7 (seven) days of lodgement of the pe tition. Its decision shall be
communicated forthwith to the Electoral Board, for enforcement.

SECTION 260
.-  (1) During the election campaign, all complaint s in respect of
the colour, acronym or symbol chosen by a candidate  or list of candidates shall
be lodged with the competent administrative court no more than 3 (three) days of
the date of publication of candidatures or of the c ognizance of the allegations.

[Page 72]
 72
The competent administrative court shall give a rul ing within 4 (four) days of
lodgement of the petition.

                           (2) Complaints in respec t of acts of injuring the character of
candidates or other offences shall be lodged with o rdinary law courts that shall
be seized by simple application. The ordinary law c ourt shall give a ruling within
4 (four) days of lodgement of the complaint and may  disqualify one or more
candidates.

CHAPTER V
POLLING

SECTION 261 .- (1) Voting shall be conducted in the headquarter s of each
division.
                        (2) Polling stations shall be determined by a decision of the
Director-General of Elections.

SECTION 262
.- Polling shall be conducted in accordance with th e provisions of
Sections  96 to 115 of this law. The reports of the  local polling stations shall be
forwarded to the regional supervisory commission fo r centralization and
verification.

CHAPTER VI
COUNTING OF VOTES AND
PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS

SECTION 263
.- (1) A regional supervisory commission is hereby set  up in each
region comprising the following:

Chairperson : a magistrate of the Court of Appeal designated by the President of
the Court of Appeal of the jurisdiction.

Members :

- 3 (three) representatives of the administration d esignated by the
Governor;
- 1 (one) representative of each political party pa rticipating in election;
- 3 (three) representatives of Elections Cameroon d esignated by the
Chairperson of the Electoral Board on the proposal of the Director-
General.

                             (2) The composition of  the regional supervisory commission
shall be established by the Electoral Board.

[Page 73]
 73
SECTION 264 .- (1) The regional supervisory commission shall ce ntralize,
ensure the counting and verification of vote-counti ng operations, on the basis of
reports forwarded by local polling commissions.

                          (2) It shall, where neces sary, correct, review or cancel the said
reports.

SECTION 265
.- (1) The regional supervisory commission shall pr oclaim the
results of the election of regional councillors at the level of the constituency
concerned, within 72 (seventy-two) hours following the close of the poll.

                          (2) The proceedings of th e regional supervisory commission
shall be minuted in a report established in several copies according to the lists of
candidates plus two signed by all the members present.  Each signatory member
shall be given a copy.

                          (3) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the representative
of the Regional State Representative for onward tra nsmission to the Minister in
charge of local and regional authorities. A copy of  the report shall equally be
forwarded to the General Directorate of Elections.

SECTION 266
.- After the elections :

- In the case of a single-member ballot, the candid ate with the majority of
votes shall be declared elected; in case of a tie, the eldest candidate
shall be declared elected ;
- In the case of a list of candidates:

          (a) for delegates of divisions:

- where a list obtains an absolute majority of vote s cast, it shall fill all
the seats;
- where no list obtains an absolute majority of vot es cast, the seats
shall be shared as follows:
* the leading list shall obtain a number of seats e qual to half of the
seats to be filled rounded up, where applicable; in  case of a tie
between 2 (two) or several lists, this number of se ats rounded down
shall be awarded to the list whose candidates have the highest
average age;
* the remaining seats shared among all the lists, b y applying the
winner-takes more rule; in case of a tie vote, the list having the
highest average age shall be preferred.

[Page 74]
 74
 (b) for representatives of traditional rulers:

- the list which obtains the majority of votes cast  shall fill all the seats;
- the list that obtains less than 5 (five) per cent  of votes cast in the
constituency shall not be considered in the proport ional allocation of
seats;
- seats shall be allocated to candidates according to the order in which
they appear on each list.

CHAPTER VII

ELECTION DISPUTES

SECTION 267 .- (1) Any elector, candidate or the state represen tative in the
region may request the total or partial cancellation of the election operation in the
region concerned by simple application to the court with jurisdiction.

                         (2) The application must be lodged within 5 (five) days of the date
when the results were announced.

                         (3) The court seized of th e application shall make a ruling within
40 (forty) days. Its decision can be challenged.

SECTION 268
- (1) Regional councillors whose election is challe nged shall
remain in office pending a final decision.

      (2) Where cancellation of all or part of the election is final, electors
shall be convened within no more than 60 (sixty) days of such cancellation.

   (3) Only the lists of candidates that took part in the general elections
shall be allowed to participate in the by-elections.

CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SECTION 269 .- (1) Members of electoral colleges provided for u nder Section
248 above shall be required to take part in the poll.

                        (2) The state shall defray the expenses related to the participation
of members of electoral colleges in the poll, in co mpliance with conditions laid
down by regulation.

SECTION 270
.- (1) The deposit shall be refunded to the candidate:

- who is declared ineligible before the printing of  ballot papers;

[Page 75]
 75

- whose candidature is finally disqualified ;
- whose list obtained less than 5% of votes cast in  the region
concerned. In this case, the copy of the results pr oclamation report
delivered by the competent regional supervisory com mission shall
entail order to pay.

(2) The deposit referred to in sub-section (1) abov e may subsequently be
collected by the representative of the candidate or list of candidates.

                            (3) In all cases other than those mentioned in sub-section (1)
above, the deposit shall be retained by the public treasury.

PART X
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO VOTING BY CAMEROONIAN CITIZENS
SETTLED OR RESIDING ABROAD

SECTION 271
.- Cameroonian citizens settled or residing abroad shall exercise
their right to vote through their participation in the election of the President of the
Republic and in referendums.

SECTION 272
.- (1) Cameroonian citizens settled or residing abr oad shall be
entered on the registers of electors opened at dipl omatic representations and
consular posts in their countries of residence or attachment.

        (2) They must enjoy their civic and politic al rights and fulfil all the
required legal conditions to be an elector.

                       (3) On the proposal of Government, polling stations shall be set up
in diplomatic representations and consular posts.

SECTION 273
.-(1) In view of the participation of Cameroonian c itizens settled or
residing abroad in the election of the President of  the Republic or in
referendums, the following structures shall be set up in diplomatic
representations and consular posts:

- commissions charged with the drawing up and revis ion of registers of
electors;
- commissions charged with the issuance and distrib ution of voters’
cards;
- local polling commissions.

[Page 76]
 76

   (2) The Electoral Board of Elections Cameroon (E LECAM) shall hold
consultations with diplomatic representations, consular posts and political parties
with a view to setting up the commissions provided for in sub-section (1) above.

  (3) The composition of the commissions referred t o in sub-section (1)
above shall be established by the Director-General of Elections.

 (4) The composition and functioning of the commiss ions referred to in sub-
section (1) above shall be determined by regulation.

SECTION 274
.- Specific rules applicable to preparatory activit ies for the election
of the President of the Republic and referendums, t he organization and
supervision of elections and referendums, polling and the counting of the votes of
Cameroonian citizens settled or residing abroad shall be laid down by regulation.

PART XI
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO THE PUBLIC FUNDING OF POLITICAL
PARTIES AND ELECTION AND REFERENDUM CAMPAIGNS

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

SECTION 275.- (1) Political parties and groups shall help the electorate in the
making of voting decisions.

  (2) As such, they may receive public funding in t he context of their
missions, according to conditions fixed under this law.

SECTION 276
.- (1) Public financing shall concern both the rout ine activities of
political parties and those devoted to the organization of election and referendum
campaigns.

(2) Funds derived from public funding shall be public funds.

                 (3) The public funding of politica l parties or candidates shall not be a
source of personal enrichment.

SECTION 277
.-(1) A control commission is hereby instituted to verify, on the
basis of supporting documents, that the use of fund s by political parties or
candidates conforms to the purpose of this law.

[Page 77]
 77
                             (2) Political parties or candidates receiving public funding
shall be bound to keep an account thereof.

                              (3) The organization,  composition, powers and functioning of
the commission referred to in sub-section (1) above  shall be fixed by the
President of the Republic.

SECTION 278
-  (1) It shall be forbidden for any political part y to receive
subsidies or funding from foreign persons, organizations, powers and/or States.

                   (2) Conditions for the private f unding of political parties and
election and referendum campaigns shall be fixed by a special instrument.

CHAPTER II
PUBLIC FUNDING OF POLITICAL PARTIES

SECTION 279 .- Each year, the finance law shall include a subsi dy to cover
certain operating costs of legally recognized polit ical parties, in accordance with
Section 281 below.

SECTION 280
.- The subsidy referred to in Section 279 above sha ll be provided
by the State to a political party to cover inter alia:

- recurrent administrative expenses;
- the dissemination of its political programme ;
- the co-ordination of the political activities of its members ;
- preparation for elections and referendums.

SECTION 281
.- The subsidy shall be divided in 2 (two) equal parts:

- the first, to be allocated to political parties rep resented in the National
Assembly, the Senate, the regional council and/or the municipal council;
- the second, to be allocated to political parties in accordance with the results
of the last election of Members of Parliament, Senators and/or regional and
municipal councillors.

SECTION 282
.- (1) The part allocated to the funding of politic al parties
represented in the National Assembly, the Senate, t he Regional Council and/or
the Municipal Council shall be paid in proportion t o their respective number of
seats.

                             (2) The Bureaux of the  National Assembly, the Senate, the
Regional Council and/or the Municipal Council shall  furnish a list of Members of

[Page 78]
 78
Parliament, Senators, regional councillors and muni cipal councillors
representing each political party.

SECTION 283
.- (1) The part allocated to the functioning of pol itical parties in
accordance with the results obtained at the last el ection of Members of
Parliament, Senators, regional councillors and municipal councillors shall be paid
to parties which obtained at least 5% of the votes cast in at least one
constituency at the said elections.

                (2) The distribution shall be in pr oportion of results obtained.

CHAPTER III
PUBLIC FUNDING OF ELECTION AND
 REFERENDUM CAMPAIGNS

SECTION 284 .- (1) The State shall contribute to the funding of  election
campaigns by defraying some expenses of political parties or candidates.

                         (2) The State’s contribution in respect of the expenses referred to
in sub-section (1) above shall be included in the f inance law of each election or
referendum year.

SECTION 285
.- Public funds earmarked for the funding of election campaigns for
the election of Members of Parliament, Senators, re gional or municipal
councillors, shall be shared in 2 (two) equal parts  among the political parties
taking part in the elections as follows :

- the first part shall be paid after publication of  the lists of candidates
to all parties depending on the lists submitted and  endorsed in the
various constituencies ;
- the second part shall be paid after the proclamat ion of results to
parties proportionately to the number of seats obtained.

SECTION 286
.- (1) Funds earmarked for the funding of election campaign for
presidential election, shall be divided in 2 (two) equal parts to candidates as
follows :

- a first part, after publication of the list of ca ndidates, allotted equally to
the various candidates ;
- a second, served after proclamation of results to  candidates with more
than 5% of votes cast, proportionately to the results obtained.

[Page 79]
 79
                              (2) Any candidate who  withdraws before the polls or who
does not participate effectively in the election ca mpaign shall be required to
refund the totality of the amount received in respe ct of the first part referred to in
sub-section (1) above.

SECTION 287
.- (1) Public funds earmarked for the funding of th e referendum
campaign shall be shared in 2 (two) equal parts as follows :

- the first part, after the publication of the list o f political parties
authorized to take part in the referendum campaign,  paid to the
various political parties proportionately to their results at the last
election of Members of Parliament and/or Senators.
- the second part, after the proclamation of results,  paid proportionately
to the results of each party concerned in the last election of Members
of Parliament and/or Senators.

                            (2) Any political party  that withdraws before the polls or that
does not participate effectively in the election ca mpaign shall be required to
refund the totality of the amount received in respe ct of the first part referred to in
sub-section (1) above.

PART XII
PENAL, MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER I
PENAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 288
.- (1) Section 122-1 of the Penal Code shall apply ag ainst any
person who:

- registers on electoral registers using a false ide ntity or who, during his
registration, conceals any of the ineligibilities provided for under this law;
- through false statements or certificates, register s himself unduly on an
electoral register or who, through the same means, unduly registers or
cancels the name of a citizen ;
- upon losing his right to vote, participates in the  poll ;
- votes, either by virtue of a false registration or  by using the name and
capacity of other registered voters;
- votes several times, following multiple registrati ons ;

[Page 80]
 80

- charged during an election with receiving and coun ting the vote of
citizens, subtracts, adds or modifies the ballot pa pers or includes a
name that is not registered ;
- through false information, slanderous statements o r any other fraudulent
acts, cancels or diverts votes or causes one or sev eral voters to abstain
from the vote ;
- before or after the poll, failing to comply with l egislative or regulatory
provisions or through any other fraudulent act, vio lates secrecy of the
poll, prejudices its fairness, breaches the conduct  of the poll and
modifies the results thereof ;
- is found guilty of fraudulent acts in the issuance  or production of
certificates of registration or striking off from electoral registers ;
- uses personal data contained in the electoral regi ster for purposes other
than elections ;
- on polling day, with or without violence, is found  to be the author or an
accomplice of the stealing of a ballot box or any other election material.

                     (2) Where the author of the of fence or his accomplice is a public
servant, in the sense of Section 131 of the Penal C ode, he shall be liable to the
penalties provided for under Section 141 of the Penal Code.

SECTION 289
.- Section 123-1 of the Penal Code shall apply to any person who:

- through menacing gatherings, clamours or demonstr ations, disrupts
election operations or infringes the exercise of th e right or freedom to
vote;
- on polling day, is found guilty of insult or viol ence against the local
polling commission or any of its members, or throug h assaults or
threats, delays or obstructs election operations ;
- through gifts, generosity, favours, promise of pu blic or private
employment or any other specific benefits offered w ith the purpose of
influencing the vote of one or several electors, ob tains their vote, either
directly or through a third party ;
- directly or through a third party, accepts or req uests from candidates the
above-mentioned gifts, generosity, favours or benefits;
- through assault, violence or threats against an e lector, either by making
him fear to lose his job or expose himself, his fam ily or fortune to
danger, influences his vote.

[Page 81]
 81

SECTION 290 .- (1) Any person who enters a polling station with a  visible
weapon shall be punished with a fine of 25 000 (twe nty-five thousand) CFA
francs and imprisonment of from 10 (ten) days to 2 (two) months or only one of
the two penalties.

                       (2) The imprisonment term ma y be extended to 4 (four) months,
and the fine to 500 000 (five hundred thousand) if the weapon is hidden.

SECTION 291
.- (1) Any activity or manifestation of a political c haracter shall be
prohibited within public establishments, as well as  in school and university
establishments.

                        (2) Any infringement of the  provisions of sub-section (1) above
shall be punished with a fine of from 25 000 (twent y-five thousand) to 250 000
(two hundred and fifty thousand) CFA francs, and im prisonment of from 10 (ten)
days to 4 (four) months, or only one of the two penalties.

SECTION 292 .- Any person who, acting on his personal behalf or  on behalf of a
political party, uses funds received in the context  of public funding for purposes
other than those provided for under this law shall be liable to the punishment
provided for under Section 184 of the Penal Code.

SECTION 293
.- Save in case of flagrante delicto, no penal proc eedings shall be
instituted against a candidate for infringement of any of the provisions of this law
before the proclamation of the election results.

CHAPTER II
MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 294 .- (1) The cost of paper , printing of ballot paper s, envelopes and
various election documents, as well as the cost of transportation or production of
election materials or documents shall be defrayed under the elections budget.

                              (2) The functioning of electoral commissions shall be charged
to the budget of Elections Cameroon and/or the elections budget.

SECTION 295.
-  (1) All judicial deeds concerning elections shall be exempted
from stamp and registration duties.

          (2) Copies of birth certificate required for determining the age of
electors and candidates shall be issued free of cha rge on an unstamped paper
upon request. They shall mention, at the top of the  page, the purpose for which
they are issued and shall not be used for any other purpose.

[Page 82]
 82
SECTION 296 .- (1)  Concerning the supervision of the election and
referendum process, Elections Cameroon may collabor ate with accredited
national and international observers.

                 (2) National observers shall be ac credited by the Minister in
charge of territorial administration.

                        (3) International observers  shall be accredited by the Minister in
charge of territorial administration, after the opi nion of the Minister in charge of
external relations.

                      (4) The Minister in charge of  territorial administration, in
consultation with Elections Cameroon, shall establi sh the code of conduct of
election observers.

SECTION 297
.-   (1) The provisions of this law shall repeal and replace those of:

- Law No. 91/20 of 16 December  1991 to lay down con ditions
governing the election of Members of Parliament, as  amended and
supplemented by Law No. 97/13 of 19 march 1997 and Law No.
2006/9 of 29 December 2006 ;
- Law No. 92/2 of 14 August 1992 to lay down conditi ons for the
election of municipal councillors, as amended by Law No. 95/24 of 11
December 1995 and Law No. 2006/10 of 26 December 2006 ;
- Law No. 92/10 of 17 September 1992 to lay down con ditions
governing the vacancy of and election to the Presid ency of the
Republic, as amended and supplemented by Law No. 97 /20 of 9
September 1997 and Law No. 2011/2 of 6 May 2011 ;
- Law No. 97/6 of 10 January 1997 to determine the p eriod for the
revision and recompilation of registers of electors;
- Law No. 2000/15 of 19 December 2000 relating to th e funding of
political parties and election campaigns;
- Law No. 2006/4 of 14  July  2006 to lay down condi tions governing
the election of regional councillors;
- Law No. 2006/5 of 14 July 2006 to lay down conditi ons governing the
election of Senators;
- Law No. 2010/3 of 13 April 2010 to lay down the re ferendum
procedure ;
- Law No. 2006/11 of 29 December 2006 to set up and lay down the
organization and functioning of Elections Cameroon (ELECAM), as
amended and supplemented by Law No. 2008/5 of 29 Ju ne 2008,
Law No. 2010/5 of 13 April 2010 and Law No. 2011/1 of 6 May 2011 ;

[Page 83]
 83

- Law No. 2011/13 of 13 July 2011 relating to voting  by Cameroonian
citizens settled or residing abroad.

SECTION 298
.- The implementation arrangements of this law shal l be specified,
as necessary, by regulatory instruments.

SECTION 299
.- This law shall be registered, published accordin g to the
procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official Gazette in English and French.

                                                           YAOUNDE,

CAVAYE YEGUIE DJIBRIL
    PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY