[Page 1]

Law No. 2012/001 of 19 April
relating to the Electoral Code

The National Assembly deliberated and adopted, the President of the
Republic hereby enacts the law set out below:

REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON
----------
PEACE – WORK – FATHERLAND
----------

[Page 2]
 2

PART I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 1.- (1) This law relates to the electoral code.

                       (2) In particular, it lays down:

- Provisions specific to  the body responsible for the organization,
management and supervision of all election and referendum operations;
- Common provisions governing the election of the President of the Republic,
Members of Parliament and Municipal Councillors and to Referendums;
- Provisions specific to the vacancy of and election to the Presidency of the
Republic;
- Provisions specific to the election of Members of Parliament to the National
Assembly;
- Provisions specific to the election of municipal councillors;
- Provisions specific to referendums;
- Provisions applicable to the election of senators;
- Provisions applicable to the election of Regional councillors;
- Provisions specific to  voting by Cameroonian citizens based or resident
abroad;
- Provisions specific to the funding of political parties and election campaigns
and referendums.

SECTION 2.- (1) Elections shall be by universal suffrage and by equal and secret
ballot.
                    (2) Suffrage may be direct or indirect under the terms and conditions
provided for by the Constitution and by this law.

SECTION 3.- The organization, management and supervision of all election and
referendum operations shall devolve upon “Elections Cameroon”, abbreviated as
“ELECAM”.

[Page 3]
 3

PART II

PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO THE BODY RESPONSIBLE FOR THE
ORGANIZATION, MANAGEMENT AND SUPERVISION OF ALL ELECTION
AND REFERENDUM OPERATIONS

CHAPTER I
GENERAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 4.- (1) “Elections Cameroon” shall be an independent body
responsible for the organization, management and supervision of all election
and referendum operations.
             (2) Elections Cameroon shall perform its duties in keeping with
the Constitution and laws and regulations in force.
              (3) Elections Cameroon shall have legal personality and
management autonomy.
                 (4) The Head Office of Elections Cameroon shall be in Yaounde.

SECTION 5.-  (1) Members of Elections Cameroon shall refrain from any act that
may undermine the independence and dignity of their duties. They shall
specifically, during their tenure of office, refrain from using their status for
purposes other than those relating to their mandate.
                     (2) Members of Elections Cameroon shall, under no
circumstances, seek or receive instructions or orders from a public or private
authority, be it national or foreign, during the performance of their duties.
SECTION 6.- (1) Members of Elections Cameroon may not be prosecuted,
investigated, arrested, detained or tried for their views expressed in the
performance of their duties.
                    (2) Save in cases of flagrante delicto , members of Elections
Cameroon may not be prosecuted during their tenure of office.

[Page 4]
 4

CHAPTER II
DUTIES
SECTION 7 .- (1) Elections Cameroon shall be responsible for the
organization, management and supervision of election and referendum
operations.
 (2) In this respect, Elections Cameroo n shall be vested with all the
requisite powers to perform its duties.

CHAPTER III
ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONING

Section 8 .- Elections Cameroon shall perform its duties through the following
organs:
 The Electoral Board (EB);
 The General Directorate of Elections (GDE).

SECTION 9 .- (1) Elections Cameroon shall be under the authority of the
Electoral Board.
                        (2) The Electoral Board shall ensure the smooth functioning of
Elections Cameroon.

I – THE ELECTORAL BOARD
A - DUTIES
SECTION 10.-  (1) The Electoral Board shall ensure compliance with the
electoral law by all stakeholders for the purpose of guaranteeing regular,
impartial, free, fair, transparent and credible polls.
        (2) In this respect, the Electoral Board shall:
- carry out any verifications and controls it may deem appropriate;

[Page 5]
 5
- scrutinize candidacy papers and publish the final list or lists of
candidates contesting presidential, legislative, senatorial, regional and
municipal elections;
- forward election reports to the C onstitutional Council or bodies provided
for by law;
- ensure the timely publication and notification of the list of members of
local polling commissions to the appropriate persons specified in the
electoral law, notably representatives of lists of candidate s or
candidates;
- control the preparation of election material and election documents
within the deadlines laid down by law;
- hear and determine claims and petitions regarding pre -election and
election operations, subject to the jurisdiction of the Constitut ional
Council and appropriate courts or authorities;
- order corrections warranted following consideration of claims or petitions
filed in respect of elections or referendums.

SECTION 11: (1) Within the framework of its duties, the Electoral Board shall:
- adopt the by-laws of Elections Cameroon;
- submit reports and/or proposals to the relevant authorities on issues
that fall within their competence;
- examine and approve draft budgets prepared by the Director General of
Elections;
- approve the action programme prepared by the Director General of
Elections;
- approve progress reports drawn up by the Director General of
Elections;
- give its opinion or make suggestions on any election-related draft
instrument submitted to it;
- on the proposal of the Director General of Elections, determine the
organization and conditions of functioning of branches;

  (2) The Electoral Board shall hold consultations with the
Administration, the judiciary, political parties and, where necessary, civil
society within the framework of the management of the electoral process.

[Page 6]
 6

B - COMPOSITION AND TENURE OF OFFICE

SECTION 12: (1) The Electoral Board shall comprise eighteen (18) members,
including 1 (one) Chairperson and 1 (one) Vice-Chairperson.
  (2) Members of the Electoral Board shall be  designated from
among independent personalities of Cameroonian nationality, recognized for
their competence, moral uprightness, intellectual honesty, patriotism,
neutrality and impartiality.
  (3) The Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and members of the
Electoral Board shall be appointed by decree of the President of the Republic
upon consultation with political parties represented in the National Assembly
and civil society.
  (4) The Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson of the Electoral Board
shall be the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of Elections Cameroon.
  (5) The term of office of members of the Electoral Board shall be
four (4) years, renewable as appropriate.
  (6) Before assuming office, members of the Electoral Board shall
take the following oath before  the Constitutional Council: “I swear to fully
and faithfully discharge my duties and to exercise my office without fear
or favour in accordance with the Constitution and laws in force, to
ensure the confidentiality of proceedings and votes, to abstain fro m
taking public positions and to decline any consultation on matters
falling within the purview of Elections Cameroon.”
  (7) They shall be bound to declare their property and assets.

SECTION 13: (1) An Electoral Board member’s term of office shall expire  in
one of the following cases:
- non-renewal of the term;
- resignation;
- death.

  (2) The resignation referred to in Sub -section (1) above shall be
duly established by the Electoral Board. In such case, the member whose

[Page 7]
 7
resignation has been established shall be replaced by the President of the
Republic, upon consultation with the Chairperson of the Electoral Board. The
member appointed shall serve the remainder of the term of the person
resigning. He shall take the oath as set out in Section 12 (6) above.

SECTION 14 : (1) Temporary incapacity of a member shall be duly
established by Elections Cameroon. Where such incapacity exceeds 6 (six)
months, the duties of such member may be terminated by decree of the
President of the Republic.
 (2) The member appointed to replace the incapacitated member
shall serve the remainder of the latter’s term. He shall take the oath as set out
in Section 12 (6) above.
SECTION 15: An Electoral Board member’s term of office may be terminated
in one of the following cases:
- physical or mental incapacity duly established by the Electoral Board;
- gross misconduct, notably breach of oath, duly established by the
Electoral Board;
- penalty imposed for a felony (life or fixed-term imprisonment coupled
with banishment and civic disqualification).

SECTION 16: A member whose term comes to an end, pursuant to the
provisions of Sections 13, 14 and 15 above, shall not be candidate for any
election following the end of such term.

C -  INCOMPATIBILITIES
SECTION 17: The duties of Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and member of
the Electoral Board shall be incompatible with those of:
- Member of Government and persons ranking as such;
- Member of the Constitutional Council;
- Judicial/Legal Officer in active employment;
- Secretary-General of a ministry and persons ranking as such;
- General Manager of a public establishment, public and semi-public
enterprise;
- Central administration director and persons ranking as such;
- Person holding an elective office in a national, regional or local body;
- Governor,
- Senior Divisional Officer, Sub-divisional Officer  and their Assistants;

[Page 8]
 8
- Traditional ruler;
- President of  Trades Chamber;
- Official and personnel of the forces of law and order in active
employment;
- Person disqualified or ineligible for elections;
- Candidates standing for the elections supervised by Elections
Cameroon;
- Members of a political party or support group of a political party, list of
candidates or candidate.

D - FUNCTIONING
SECTION 18: The Electoral Board shall hold 4 (four) ordinary sessions each
year when convened by its Chairperson. However, when the need arises or at
the request of 2/3 (two -thirds) of its members, the Board shall meet in
extraordinary session.
SECTION 19: (1) During an election period, the Electoral Board shall meet as
often as necessary.
  (2) The Electoral Board shall meet at least once every fortnight
upon the convening of the electorate.
SECTION 20 : Meetings of the Electoral Board shall be convened by the
Chairperson or, where the latter is unavailable, by the Vice-Chairperson.
SECTION 21 : (1) Decisions of the Electoral Board shall be taken by
consensus or, failing that, decisions shall be taken by a simple majority of
members present. In the event of a tie, the Chairperson shall have the casting
vote.
  (2) The quorum shall be at least 2/3 (two-thirds) of members
present.
  (3) Minutes of Electoral Board meetings shall be taken, and shall
be signed by the Chairperson and Secretary.
  (4) The secretarial services of Electoral Board meetings shall be
provided by the General Directorate of Elections.

[Page 9]
 9

CHAPTER IV
GENERAL DIRECTORATE OF ELECTIONS

SECTION 22: The General Directorate of Elections shall be responsible for
the preparation and material organization of election and referendum
operations, under the supervision of the Electoral Board.
SECTION 23 : (1) The General Directorate of Elections shall be under the
authority of a Director General, who may be assisted by a Deputy Director
General.
  (2) The duties of Director General and Deputy Director General
shall be incompatible with the duties or offices referred to in Section 17 of this
law.
I – APPOINTMENT
SECTION 24: (1) The Director General and the Deputy Director General of
Elections shall be appointed by decree of the President of the Republic for a
term of 5 (five) years, which may be  renewable upon consultation with the
Electoral Board.

  (2) In the event of vacancy of the office of Director General or
Deputy Director General of Elections, he/she shall be replaced in accordance
with the procedure laid down in Sub -section (1) above, t o serve for the
remainder of the term.
SECTION 25: (1) The duties of Director General or Deputy Director General
of Elections shall be terminated in one of the following cases:
- non-renewal of the term of office;
- resignation;
- death.

  (2) The term of offic e of the Director General or Deputy Director
General of Elections may be terminated in one of the following cases:

[Page 10]
 10

- physical or mental incapacity duly established by the Electoral Board;
- gross misconduct, duly established by the Electoral Board;
- penalty i mposed for a felony (life or fixed -term imprisonment coupled
with banishment and civic disqualification).

II – DUTIES
SECTION 26 : (1) The Director General of Elections shall be responsible,
under the authority of the Electoral Board, for all election and referendum
operations, in particular:
- drawing up, managing, updating and keeping the national voters’
register as well as election documents and materials;
- procuring and distributing election materials and documents;
- drawing up electoral registers, in conjunction with the relevant joint
commissions;
- publishing electoral registers;
- issuing voter cards;
- distributing voter cards, in conjunction with the relevant joint
commissions
- organizing or supervising the training of electoral personnel;
- preparing the annual draft budget of the Electoral Board and of the
General Directorate of Elections;
- preparing draft budgets of elections;
- executing the budget of General Directorate of Elections and the
budgets of elections;
- managing sundry resources and equipment placed at his disposal;
- receiving and forwarding to the Electoral Board candidacy papers for
presidential, legislative, senatorial, regional and municipal elections;
- receiving and forwarding to the Electoral Board applications to
participate in referendum campaigns;
- distributing, within the statutory time-limit, samples of ballot papers to
candidates or political parties taking part in the polls for election or
referendum campaign purposes;
- coordinating the work of observers accredited by the appropriate
national authorities;
- organizing polling stations;
- coordinating all bodies responsible for election operations;
- coordinating the forwarding of election reports and other election
documents from polling stations to the head office of Elections
Cameroon;
- forwarding election reports to the Electoral Board.

[Page 11]
 11
  (2) In this respect, the Director General of Elections shall be
vested with all powers necessary for the performance of his duties.
  (3) He shall report on his activities to the Electoral Board at least
once every three months and as often as may be necessary in an election
period.
  (4) After every election, the Director General of Elections shall be
responsible for centralizing and keeping all election documents and materials.
  (5) He shall draw up the final report on the conduct of the poll.

SECTION 27 : (1) The Director General of Elections shall be responsible,
under the authority of the Electoral Board, for the administration of Elections
Cameroon.
  (2) He shall attend Electoral Board meetings in an adviso ry
capacity.
  (3) He shall represent Elections Cameroon within the framework
of his duties and may go to law.
  (4) The Deputy Director General of Elections shall perform such
duties and carry out such missions as shall be entrusted to him by the
Director General of Elections within the framework of the administration of
Elections Cameroon.
III – SUPPORT BODIES
SECTION 28 : (1) The General Directorate  of Elections shall have support
bodies.
  (2) The organization and functioning of support bodies referred t o
under Section 28 (1) above shall be laid down by the Electoral Board, upon
the proposal of the Director General of Elections.
  (3) Officials of support bodies shall be appointed by the Director
General of Elections, upon the approval of the Electoral Board.

[Page 12]
 12

IV – STAFF
SECTION 29 : (1) The Director General of Elections shall recruit staff on
behalf of Elections Cameroon, in keeping with the laws and regulations in
force.
  (2) He may also request the secondment of civil servants or
transfer of State c ontract workers governed by the Labour Code and
Categories 1-6 State employees.
  (3) Staff of Elections Cameroon shall be governed by the in-house
staff rules adopted by the Electoral Board in keeping with the laws and
regulations in force.
  (4) Througho ut their employment, civil servants seconded or
transferred, shall be governed by labour laws, subject to the general rules
and regulations of the Civil Service in respect of retirement, advancement and
end of secondment.
  (5) During the election period, the Director General of Elections
may hire temporary staff for the period required to perform specific duties.

V - BRANCHES
SECTION 30 : (1) Elections Cameroon shall have branches at regional,
divisional and council levels.
  (2) The organization and functioning of branches shall be laid
down by the Electoral Board, upon the proposal of the Director General of
Elections.
  (3) Officers of the regional branches shall be appointed by the
Electoral Board, on the recommendation of the Director General of Elections.
  (4) Officials of the divisional and council branches shall be
appointed by the Director General of Elections, upon the approval of the
Electoral Board.

[Page 13]
 13

CHAPTER V
FINANCIAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 31 : The resources of Elections Cameroon shall be pub lic funds
managed in compliance with public accounting rules.
SECTION 32: (1) Elections Cameroon shall have an annual budget and an
elections budget in an election year.
  (2) The Director General of Elections shall be the authorizing
officer of the budget of Elections Cameroon and of the elections budget.
SECTION 33: (1) The draft budgets referred to in Section 32 above shall be
prepared by the Director General of Elections and approved by the Electoral
Board.
  (2) The Chairperson of the Electoral Board s hall forward the draft
budgets referred to in Sub -section (1) above to Government for concerted
consideration and tabling before Parliament for adoption as part of the
Finance Law.
SECTION 34:  (1) The Electoral Board shall have a special appropriation set
out in the Finance Law, to be used to pay the staff referred to in section 41
below.
  (2) The Treasury Accounting Officer provided for in Section 36
below shall execute the expenditure of the Electoral Board in accordance with
the instruments in force.
  (3) At the end of the financial year, he shall prepare a statement of
expenditure which he shall submit to the Minister in charge of finance for
auditing. Such statement of expenditure shall be accompanied by the other
accounting documents to be forwarded to the Audit Bench.
SECTION 35 : (1) Upon adoption of the State budget by Parliament, the
Minister in charge of finance shall disburse funds to Elections Cameroon as
priority State expenditure as set out in the appropriations of the Finance Law.

[Page 14]
 14
  (2) Whe re elections are held in a non -election year, the State
shall take appropriate measures to allocate requisite resources to Elections
Cameroon for the organization of the elections.
SECTION 36: The Minister in charge of finance shall appoint a Treasury
Accounting Officer to Elections Cameroon.  .
SECTION 37:  (1) An Auditor shall be appointed to Elections Cameroon by
the Minister in charge of finance for a term of office of 3(three) years,
renewable once.
  (2) At the end of every financial year, the Auditor shall submit to
the Minister in charge of finance a report on the financial management of
Elections Cameroon.
SECTION 38: The administrative accounts and management accounts of
Elections Cameroon shall be submitted annually to the Minister in charge of
finance and to the Audit Bench of the Supreme Court.

SECTION 39: The accounts of Elections Cameroon shall be audited annually
by the relevant State services.

CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
SECTION 40: A decree of the President of the Republic shall  lay down the
protocol ranks and privileges of the Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson of the
Electoral Board, members of the Electoral Board, as well as the Director
General and Deputy Director General of Elections.
SECTION 41: (1) The Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Electoral
Board shall be entitled to monthly remuneration and benefits in kind.
  (2) Members of the Electoral Board shall be entitled to session
allowance during Electoral Board meetings and shall be reimbursed all
expenses incurred in respect of such meetings upon production of supporting
documents.
  (3) Allowances and mission allowances shall be granted to
members of the Electoral Board.

[Page 15]
 15

(4) The monthly remuneration, session allowances, allowances and mission
allowances referred to in Sub-sections 1, 2 and 3 above shall be determined
by decree of the President of the Republic.
SECTION 42: The rules of procedure and modus operandi of Elections
Cameroon shall be laid down by by-laws.
 SECTION 43  (1) Government services shall collabora te with and support
Elections Cameroon in the performance of its statutory duties.
  (2) The Minister in charge of territorial administration shall ensure
permanent liaison between Government and Elections Cameroon. In this
respect, the latter shall submit copies of minutes and progress reports to him.
SECTION 44 : (1) In the event of shortcomings or dysfunctions  on the
part of Elections Cameroon, the President of the Republic shall take the
remedial measures he deems necessary.
  (2) Pursuant to Articles 5 and 8 of the Constitution, the
President of the Republic may terminate, as the case may be, the duties
of the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and members of the Electoral
Board as well as those of the Director General and Deputy Director
General of Elections.
PART III
COMMON PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE ELECTION OF THE
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC, MEMBERS OF PARLIAMENT,
MUNICIPAL COUNCILLORS AND REFERENDUMS

CHAPTER I
THE ELECTORATE
I - QUALIFICATION OF ELECTORS
 SECTION 45 : Every person of Cameroonian nationalit y of either sex, who
has reached the age of 20 (twenty) years, is registered on an electoral
register and is free from all cases of disqualification provided for by law, shall
be entitled to be an elector.
SECTION 46:  (1) Every Cameroonian citizen enjoyi ng the right to vote who
has their home  of origin or place of abode within a council area or has

[Page 16]
 16
actually been resident therein for at least the last 6 (six) months may be
entered in the electoral register in such council area.
  (2) Every Cameroonian cit izen who does not satisfy the age or
residence conditions at the time of revision of electoral registers may also be
entered in the electoral register, provided they satisfy such conditions before
final closure of the said register or, if need be, polling day.
  (3) Every member of the Armed Forces and person of equivalent
status in any corps may be entered in the electoral register of the place where
their unit or home port is established without taking into account the
residence condition.
  (4) Every citizen who proves that their name is on the income tax
assessment list of a given constituency for the fifth consecutive year may
likewise be entered on the electoral register of such constituency.
  (5) In the case referred to in Sub -section (4) above, any
application for registration shall necessarily be accompanied by a certificate
issued by the Council Branch of Elections Cameroon having jurisdiction over
the applicant’s place of abode or habitual residence to the effect that the
applicant is not register ed or that they have been struck off the electoral
register.

II - ELECTORAL DISQUALIFICATIONS
SECTION 47: Whoever:
(a) has been convicted of a felony, even by default;
(b) has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment, without suspension, of
more than 3 (three) months;
(c) has been sentenced to a term of imprisonment, accompanied by
suspension of sentence or probation, of more than 6 (six) months;
(d) is the subject of a warrant of arrest;
(e) is an un-discharged bankrupt who has been so adjudged either by a
Cameroonian court or a foreign judgment enforceable in Cameroon;
(f) is insane  or of unsound mind,
shall not be entered on the electoral register.
SECTION 48 : (1) Whoever has been convicted of any offence against the
security of the State, without being rehabilitated or grant ed amnesty, may not
be entered on any electoral register for a period of 10 (ten) years.

[Page 17]
 17
  (2) The period of 10 (ten) years provided for in Sub -section (1)
above shall run from the day of release for persons sentenced to a term of
imprisonment or from the day of payment of the fine, where applicable.

CHAPTER II
ELECTORAL COMMISSIONS
SECTION 49 : Joint electoral commissions shall be set up and charged
respectively with preparing electoral activities, organizing and supervising
election operations, polling operations and the final counting of votes.

I - COMMISSIONS CHARGED WITH PREPARING ELECTORAL
ACTIVITIES
 SECTION 50 : Preparing electoral activities shall include drawing up and
revising electoral registers as well as the issuance and distribution of voters ’
cards.
A - Commissions Charged with the Revision of Electoral Registers
SECTION 51 : Electoral registers shall be drawn up by the branches of
Elections Cameroon, in conjunction with the competent joint commissions.
SECTION 52: (1) In every council, there shall be a commission charged with
the revision of the electoral registers. Where the area or size of the population
of the council so warrants, the Director General of Elections may set up
several electoral register revision commissions.
  (2) The electoral register revision commission shall comprise:
Chairman: a representative of Elections Cameroon, appointed by the officer
of the divisional branch of Elections Cameroon;
Members:
- a representative of the Administration, appointed by the Sub-divisional
Officer;
- the Mayor, or a Deputy Mayor or a Municipal Councillor, appointed by
the Mayor;
- a representative of each legalized political party operating within the
territorial  jurisdiction of the council concerned.

[Page 18]
 18
  (3) The Sub -divisional Officer, the Mayor an d each political
party must, within at least 15 (fifteen) days before the revision of the electoral
register commences, notify the Council Branch of Elections Cameroon of the
names of their representatives appointed to sit on the commission.
  (4) Where a political party fails to appoint a representative in good
time, the Head of the Council Branch of Elections Cameroon may, after a
formal notice remains unheeded, appoint a civil society personality to the
commission.
  (5) Where the Mayor fails to appoint a representative in good time,
the Head of the Council Branch of Elections Cameroon shall, after a formal
notice remains unheeded, refer the matter to the Senior Divisional Officer
who shall appoint a council official to sit on the commission as the
representative of the Council.
  (6) The composition of each voter register revision commission
shall be approved by a decision of the Head of the Divisional Branch of
Elections Cameroon.
  (7) The duties of member of the revision commission shall be
honorary.
  (8) The work of the commission may be validly carried out by a
single member provided that all the other members are kept informed of such
work prior to its completion.
  (9) At the end of its proceedings, the voter register revision
commission shall draw  up a report, signed by the President and
commissioners.
B -      Commissions charged with supervising the issuance and
distribution of voter cards
SECTION 53: (1) In every Council, there shall be one or several commissions
charged with supervising the issuance and distribution of voter cards.
(2) This commission referred to in (1) above shall comprise the following:
Chairperson: a representative of Elections Cameroon, appointed by the
Head of the Divisional Branch of Elections Cameroon;
Members:
- a representative of the Administration, appointed by the Sub-divisional
Officer;
- the Mayor, or a Deputy Mayor or a Municipal Councillor, appointed by
the Mayor;

[Page 19]
 19

- a representative of each legally authorized political party  operating
within the jurisdiction of the council concerned.
  (3) The composition of the commission charged with supervising
the preparation and distribution of voter cards shall be approved by a decision
of the Head of the Divisional Branch of Elections Cameroon who, at least 15
(fifteen) days be fore the distribution of voter cards commences, shall
transform the commissions charged with the revision of electoral registers
into commissions charged with supervising the preparation and distribution of
voter cards.
  (4) At the end of its deliberation s, the commission charged with
supervising the preparation and distribution of voter cards shall draw up a
report, signed by the Chairperson and commissioners.

II - LOCAL POLLING COMMISSIONS
SECTION 54: (1) Every polling station shall have a Local Polling Commission
comprising:
Chairperson: a personality appointed by the Head of the Divisional Branch of
Elections Cameroon.
Members:
- a representative of the Administration, appointed by the Subdivisional
Officer;
- a representative of each candidate, list of candidates or political party.
  (2) The names of representatives of the Administration and
candidates, list of candidates or political parties chosen from among electors
registered in the electoral register of the polling station concerned shall be
notified to the Council Branch of Elections Cameroon, no later than the sixth
day before the election day.
  (3) The composition of each Local Polling Commission shall be
approved by a decision of the Head of the Divisional Branch of Elections
Cameroon.
SECTION 5 5: During vote counting, the Chairperson of the Local Polling
Commission shall appoint 4 (four) electors from among electors registered on
the electoral register of the polling station to serve as scrutineers.

[Page 20]
 20
SECTION 56 : Where one or more representatives of candidates, lists of
candidates or political parties is/are absent at the opening of the poll, the
Chairperson of the Local Polling Commission must, by decision recorded in
the report, fill up such vacancies in the Commission by appointing electors
whose names feature in the electoral register of the polling station and who
can read and write English or French.
SECTION 57 :  (1) At least 3 (three) members of the Local Polling
Commission must be present at the polling station or its immediate vicinity
throughout   polling.
  (2) However, where the Chairperson finds it absolutely impossible
to form the Local Polling Commission, they may open the polling station at
the time fixed for the commencement of the poll. The Chairperson shall
mention in their report the time when Commissioners were appointed and
assumed duty.
SECTION 58: Representatives of candidates, lists of candidates or political
parties who, for no valid reasons, are not present at the time of
commencement of polling and have been replaced by the  Chairperson under
the conditions specified in Sections 5 6 and 57 above, shall not be entitled to
sit on the Local Polling Commission.
SECTION 59 : Every candidate, list of candidates or political party may
appoint 3 (three) polling agents for each Subdivis ion who shall have free
access to all the polling stations of the Subdivision. Such agents may be
expelled from a polling station only if they cause a breach of the peace. Such
expulsion shall be recorded in the report. The agents may make comments
on the conduct of the poll to the Local Polling Commission. Such comments
shall be recorded in the report.
SECTION 60 : (1) The Chairperson of the Local Polling Commission shall
alone be responsible for maintaining law and order at the polling station.
  (2) They shall order the expulsion from the polling station of any
person who is not an elector registered under the polling station, with the
exception of candidates, heads of administrative units within whose territorial
jurisdiction the station is situated and their representatives.
  (3) They shall prohibit anyone from obstructing the polling station.
They may requisition the forces of law and order to restore order in the polling
station or to cause the station to be vacated.
  (4) No elector may be allowed to enter the polling station if they
are carrying any weapon whatsoever.

[Page 21]
 21
SECTION 61 : (1) The Local Polling Commission shall rule on any
difficulties relating to the organization and conduct of the poll and vote
counting. In case of a tie, the President shall have the casting vote.
  (2) Where the decision of the Local Polling Commission is
impugned either, by a Commissioner , an elector affected, a candidate, or an
agent of a list of candidates or political party, mention of such decision, the
reasons therefor and the dispute shall be made in the report.
SECTION 62: (1) The Local Polling Commission shall prepare a report on all
polling operations. The said report shall be signed by the Chairperson and
members present and forwarded to the Head of the Divisional Branch of
Elections Cameroon.
  (2) The Head of the Council Branch   of Elections Cameroon shall,
within 48 (forty-eight) hours of the close of polling operations, forward a copy
of the reports of Local Polling Commissions and appended   documents to the
Divisional Supervisory Commission or the Council Supervisory Commission,
if need be.
  (3) The Divisional Supervisory Commission shall, within 72
(seventy-two) hours, forward the report of its proceedings to the National
Commission for the Final Counting of Votes.

III - DIVISIONAL SUPERVISORY COMMISSIONS
SECTION 63: A Divisional Supervisory Commission shall be set up in each
Division and shall be responsible for ensuring the smooth conduct of
election preparations and election operations proper. To this en d, the
Divisional Supervisory Commission shall:
- supervise operations for drawing up, keeping and revising electoral
registers;
- examine all protests  or claims relating to electoral registers or voter
cards;
- supervise the distribution of voter cards;
- authorize any corrections it deems necessary after examining protests
or claims against the decisions of the competent commissions relating
to the electoral register or voter cards;
- centralize and check returning operations carried out by Local Polling
Commissions and documents relating thereto. In case of a minor
irregularity, it may request immediate regularization by members of the
Local Polling Commission.

[Page 22]
 22
SECTION 64 : (1) The Divisional Supervisory Commission, whose seat
shall be the chief-town of the Division, shall comprise:
Chairperson:  the President of the High Court with territorial jurisdiction.
Members:
- 3 (three) representatives of the Administration, appointed by the Senior
Divisional Officer;
- 3 (three) representatives of Elections Cameroon, appointed by the
Head of the Divisional Branch of Elections Cameroon;
-  a representative of each candidate.
   (2) The composition of the Divisional Supervisory Commission
shall be approved by decision of the Head of the Regional Branch of
Elections Cameroon.
  (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sub -section (1) above, the
Divisional Supervisory Commission shall be presided over by a Judicial
/Legal Officer appointed by the President of the Court of Appeal with territorial
jurisdiction where there is no High C ourt in the Division, or where the
President of the said High Court is unavoidably absent, as the case may be.
  (4) The defaulting member may, by simple notification to the
Chairperson of the Divisional Supervisory Commission, be replaced by the
authority or candidate who appointed them.
SECTION 65 : (1) The list of members of the Divisional Supervisory
Commission shall be kept permanently at the Registry of the High Court, at
the Senior Divisional Office, and at the Divisional Branch of Elections
Cameroon.
  (2) It may be consulted by any elector of the constituency.
SECTION 66 : The duties of Chairman and of member of the Divisional
Supervisory Commission shall be honorary.
SECTION 67: (1) The proceedings of the Divisional Supervisory Commission
shall be co nducted on the basis of reports forwarded by officials of Council
Branches of Elections Cameroon.
  (2) In case of miscalculation, the Divisional Supervisory
Commission may correct the corresponding reports. However, it shall not
cancel them. In case of re ctification or adjustment, the Divisional Supervisory
Commission must explain its decision and mention it in its report.
  (3) The deliberations of the Divisional Supervisory Commission
shall be recorded in reports signed by the Chairperson and commissione rs.

[Page 23]
 23
The report and appended documents from Local Polling Commissions shall
be forwarded to the National Commission for the Final Counting of Votes
within 72 (seventy-two) hours.
  (4) A copy of the said report shall be forwarded to the General
Directorate of Elections.

IV - THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR THE FINAL COUNTING OF
VOTES
SECTION 68: (1) A National Commission for the Final Counting of Votes is
hereby set up. It shall be composed as follows:
Chairperson: a member of the Constitutional Council, appoin ted by the
President of the Constitutional Council;
Members:
- 2 (two) Judicial Officers appointed by the Chief Justice of the Supreme
Court;
- 5 (five) representatives of the Administration, appointed by the Minister
in charge of territorial administration;
- 5 (five) representatives of Elections Cameroon, appointed by the
Director General of Elections;
- 1 (one) representative of each candidate or political party taking part in
the election, appointed by the candidate or his political party.
  (2) The composition  of the National Commission for the Final
Counting of Votes shall be approved by a resolution of the Electoral Board.
  (3) The list of members of the National Commission shall be
notified to the Constitutional Council and made available to the public.
SECTION 69: (1) The National Commission for the Final Counting of Votes
shall carry out the final counting of votes, on the basis of reports and
appended documents submitted by Divisional Supervisory Commissions.
  (2) It shall correct any clerical errors in the counting of votes.
However, it shall not cancel the corresponding reports.
  (3) The final counting of votes shall be public and shall take place
at the seat of the Constitutional Council.
  (4) The National Commission for the Final Counting of Votes s hall
draw up a report on all its operations. The report, signed by the Chairperson

[Page 24]
 24
and Commissioners, together with appended documents, shall be
forwarded within 5 (five) days to the Constitutional Council.

CHAPTER III
ELECTORAL REGISTERS
I - DRAWING UP OF ELECTORAL REGISTERS
SECTION 70 : (1) Electoral registers shall be drawn up and kept in every
Council. An electoral register shall also be drawn up for each polling station.
  (2) The electoral registers shall be drawn up in alphabetical order.
  (3) Ever y newly registered elector shall be issued a receipt
bearing the date, place and registration number.
  (4) The receipt referred to in subsection (3) above shall be used
only for lodging complaints relating to voter registration operations and may
not, for any reason whatsoever, be used in place of the voter card.
  (5) The register shall contain the full name, date and place of
birth, occupation, residence or place of abode of every elector.
SECTION 71 : Entry on the electoral register shall be a right. It shall be
carried out by the branches of Elections Cameroon, in collaboration with the
relevant joint commissions.
SECTION 72: (1) The electoral register shall bear the names of all registered
electors who have been residing in the council for at least 6 (six) months.
  (2) The electoral register shall further contain the names of
electors who have been registered under the provisions of Section 46 of this
law.
  (3) Such registration shall not be carried out automatically. It shall
be done only at the expr ess request of the elector who shall first adduce
evidence that their name does not appear on any other electoral register.

SECTION 73: (1) No person may have their name entered on more than one
electoral register or several times on the same register.

[Page 25]
 25
  (2) Where an elector is registered several times on the same
register, only one registration shall be valid. Such elector shall be
automatically struck off the other registers.
  (3) Where an elector is registered on several registers, only the
last registration shall be valid, save otherwise requested by the elector. They
shall be automatically struck off the other registers.
  (4) Any refusal to register an elector must be justified and notified
to the elector concerned. Such refusal may be disputed or challenged before
the Divisional Supervisory Commission or the Electoral Board as the case
may be.
II - ANNUAL REVISION OF ELECTORAL REGISTERS
Section 74: (1) Electoral registers shall be permanent. They shall be revised
every year throughout the national territory.
  (2) The annual revision of the electoral registers shall commence
on 1 January and end on 31 August of every year.
SECTION 75 (1) The Director General of Elections may, after obtaining the
assent of the Electoral Board, order by decision, a th orough recompilation of
the registers at the time of annual revision.
  (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 74 (2) and 75 (1)
above, annual revision or, where applicable, the recompilation of electoral
registers shall be suspended from the date of convening the electors.
  (3) In case of recompilation of electoral registers, the Director
General of Elections may extend the period provided for in Section 72 (2)
above by no more than 3 (three) months.
 (4) During the period of the revision of elect oral registers,
applications for expunging names or for modification shall be submitted to the
commissions provided for under Section 52 above. Such commissions shall
carry out the corresponding operations.
SECTION 76 : (1) In case of recompilation, entirel y new electoral registers
shall be drawn.
  (2) During the period of revision, the following persons shall be
entered in the electoral register:
- citizens who meet the conditions laid down by law;
- citizens whose names were previously omitted.
   (3) The commission shall expunge from the register the names of:

[Page 26]
 26
- deceased persons;
- persons ordered to be struck off the register by the competent judicial
authority;
- persons who no longer meet the conditions laid down by law;
- persons found to have been wrongfully registered.
  (4) Modifications shall be made to the electoral register following
any change of residence or clerical errors noticed especially regarding the full
name, parentage, date and place of birth of electors.
SECTION 77: (1) Operations to enter electo rs, expunge electors’ names and
make adjustments on the electoral register shall be carried out on the
registers and forms provided for that purpose by Elections Cameroon.
  (2) The registers referred to in Section 77 (1) above shall be kept
and preserved at Council Branches of Elections Cameroon. Such registers
may be consulted by any person who so desires.
  (3) During the period of revision of electoral registers, any citizen
whose name has been omitted from the electoral register may apply to be
entered on the register.
SECTION 78 : (1) The Chairperson of the Commission charged with the
Revision of Electoral registers shall forward the report of the proceedings of
the said Commission to the Divisional Branch of Elections Cameroon, no later
than 5 Septembe r. All documents relating to deletion of names and
modifications shall be appended to such report.
  (2) After keying in, carrying out technical checks and drawing up
the provisional electoral register of the Division, the Head of the Divisional
Branch of Elections Cameroon shall forward the corresponding electoral
registers to the Council Branches concerned for posting up no later than 20
October.
  (3) Once the provisional electoral registers are published, any
political party or elector may refer any irr egularities or omissions noted to the
Revision Commission or, where necessary, the Divisional Supervisory
Commission.
SECTION 79 : (1) The Commission charged with the Revision of Electoral
registers shall forward a report on any corrections made on the prov isional
registers to the Divisional Branch of Elections Cameroon, no later than 10
November.
  (2) Following the drawing up of the revised electoral register for
the Division, the Divisional Branch of Elections Cameroon shall forward the

[Page 27]
 27
said register to t he Director General of Elections, through the Regional
Branch, no later than 10 December.
SECTION 80 : At the end of the revision exercise, and based on the
documents and data provided by the Regional Branches of Elections
Cameroon, the Director General of Elections shall draw up and publish the
national electoral register, no later than 30 December.
SECTION 81: (1) The Director General of Elections shall be responsible for
keeping the national electoral register.
  (2) Any political party, elector or repres entative of a political party
or candidate may petition the Electoral Board for any case in particular of
omission, error or multiple entry of an elector on the national electoral
register.
  (3) Where the petition is rejected, the person concerned may fil e
an appeal to the Court of Appeal with territorial jurisdiction over Elections
Cameroon, which shall give a final ruling, free of charge and with no particular
procedure, within 5 (five) days of the filing of the appeal.

III - REGISTRATION OUTSIDE REVISION PERIODS
SECTION 82 : (1) The following persons may be entered on the electoral
register outside revision periods, without any residence requirements and
where such changes lead to a change of residence:
(a) Civil Servants and State employees who have been either transferred
or placed on retirement after the closing  date for registration, as well as any
members of their families who are living with them on the date of such
transfer or retirement;
(b) Servicemen who have been demobilized after the expiry of the time
limit for registration;
  (2) The provisions of Section 82(1) (a) above shall also apply to
private sector employees who have been either transferred or placed on
retirement.
  (3) Applications for entry on electoral registers outside the revision
period shall be supported by all relevant information and filed with the Council
Branch of Elections Cameroon.

[Page 28]
 28
SECTION 83 : (1) Applications shall be examined by the (Council)
Commission charged with the Revision of Electoral registers within a period
of 9 (nine) days, and no later than 6 (six) days before polling day. The
decisions of the Commission shall be notified forthwith to the parties
concerned.
 (2) The Commission shall enter the name of the elector in the
electoral register and in the addendum which shall be published no later than
4 (four) days before the polling day.

CHAPTER IV
VOTER CARDS
SECTION 84 : (1) Every elector whose name has been entered on an
electoral register shall be issued a biometric voter card which shall bear
their full name,  date and place of birth, parentage, photograph, finger
prints, occupation, domicile or residence.
  (2) Voter cards shall be permanent.
  (3) Where voter cards are renewed or new names are entered on
the electoral register, the cards shall be distributed within a period of 40
(forty) days before the polling day.
SECTION 85: (1) The distribution of voter cards shall be carried out under the
supervision of the Commission referred to in Section 53 of this law.
  (2) Voter cards not delivered to their legal ho lders shall be left at
the polling station where such holders are registered and shall remain at their
disposal until the close of the poll.
  (3) Such cards shall be delivered to the legal holders only upon
the production of the identity card of each hold er or the receipt referred to in
Section 70 above.
  (4) In every polling station, at the close of the poll, the
Commission shall count the unclaimed cards, stamp and place them in a
sealed packet which it shall take to the Council Branch of Elections
Cameroon with the election report specifying the number of such cards.

CHAPTER V
CONVENING THE ELECTORS

[Page 29]
 29
SECTION 86 : (1) Electors shall be convened by decree of the President
of the Republic.
  (2) No less than 90 (ninety) days shall elapse between the date o f
publication of the convening decree and the day of election.
  (3) Polling shall take place on a Sunday or a day declared a public
holiday and shall last a single day.
  (4)The decree convening electors shall specify the time of
opening and closing of polling stations.

CHAPTER VI
ELECTION CAMPAIGN
SECTION 87: (1) The election campaign shall open on the 15th (fifteenth) day
preceding the election and close at midnight on the eve of the election day.
  (2) Candidates may prepare circulars, manifestos or posters, at
their own expense or that of the party presenting their candidatures.
  (3) Such circulars, manifestos or posters shall be in the colour
chosen for the candidate or party. They shall bear the initials chosen for
printing the ballot papers.
  (4) The maximum size of the posters prepared for the election
campaign shall be determined by decision of the Director General of
Elections.
SECTION 88 : (1) The General Directorate  of Elections shall, for every
candidate, party or list of candidates running in the election, print a number of
ballot papers equivalent to the number of electors registered, plus one quarter
thereof, as well as campaign ballot papers.
  (2) The size of ballot papers shall be determined by decision of
the General Directorate  of Elec tions, after consultation with the Electoral
Board.
SECTION 89 : (1) Such circulars, manifestoes and posters signed by the
representative of the list, candidate or political party shall be submitted in
duplicate to Elections Cameroon for prior endorsement.
  (2) A copy of such circular, manifesto and poster shall be filed and
the other copy, carrying the endorsement, shall be handed back to the

[Page 30]
 30
candidate or to the representative of the candidate, list or political party.
The printed document shall make mention of the endorsement.
  (3) The endorsement shall be withheld where a document is
tantamount to a call to violence or undermines national territorial integrity, the
Republican form of the State, State sovereignty, national unity or incites
hatred against a State official or a citizen or a body of citizens.
  (4) The endorsement shall indicate the colour and initials assigned
to each candidate or political party.
SECTION 90: Any document published and circulated in contravention of the
provisions of Sec tions 87, 88 and 89 shall, at the instance of Elections
Cameroon, be seized by the Administrative Authorities without prejudice to
such criminal prosecution as may be instituted against the authors of such
documents and the disseminators thereof.
SECTION 91: (1) At the instance of Elections Cameroon, Council authorities
shall make available to every candidate or list of candidates space for the
display of posters and other campaign material.
  (2) No public display of posters in relation to the election, al beit
stamped, shall be allowed outside the authorized spaces, whether by
candidates or by any other person or group.
  (3) This prohibition shall equally apply to posters or notices
displayed in a place open to the public or on private premises if they are  not
displayed by the owner of the premises.
  (4) It is prohibited for candidates, lists of candidates or political
parties to post up their campaign material on panels reserved for other
candidates, lists of candidates or political parties.
  (5) Electio ns Cameroon shall order any posters unlawfully
displayed to be removed.
SECTION 92 : (1) It is forbidden for any one to circulate or cause the
circulation of any ballot papers, circulars, documents articles or objects
related to the election in any way whatsoever, on election day.
  (2) Any document or other articles circulated in violation of the
provisions of Section 92 (1) above shall, at the behest of Elections
Cameroon, be seized by the Administrative Authorities without prejudice to
such criminal prosecution as may be instituted against the offenders.
SECTION 93 : (1) During the election campaign period, the political parties
running, or candidates or their representatives may organize meetings to
explain and present electoral platforms and manifestoes to electors.

[Page 31]
 31
  (2) For the purposes of Section 93 (1) above, the
representative of each list or any other agent of each political party or
candidate intending to hold election meetings shall submit the meeting
schedule to the administrative authorities and the branches of Elections
Cameroon so that steps can be taken to ensure the maintenance of law and
order.
  (3) In the absence of a meeting schedule, any public meeting
organized as part of the election campaign must be declared with the
Administrative Authorities and the branches of Elections Cameroon at least
24 (twenty -four) hours in advance, indicating the time and venue of the
meeting.
SECTION 94: (1) Where public law and order are seriously threatened, the
administrative authority may, by order, prohibit any such meeting(s).
  (2) In such case, the administrative authority shall agree with the
organizers on a new date or, where necessary, venue to enable them to hold
such meeting(s). It shall inform the competent branches of Elections
Cameroon of such arrangements.
SECTION 95 : (1) Unless otherwise authorized by the competent
administrative authorities with territorial jurisdiction, meetings may not be held
on the public highway.
  (2) The administrative authority may, having regard to local
conditions, fix by order the hour after which no meeting may continue.

CHAPTER VII
THE POLL
I - POLLING STATIONS
 SECTION 96: (1) The Director General of Elections shall draw up the list of
polling stations for every council.
  (2) Such list shall specify the area covered by each polling station.
  (3) There shall be one polling station for a maximum of 500 (five
hundred) electors.
  (4) Every polling station shall be located in public premises or in
premises open to the public.

[Page 32]
 32
SECTION 97 : The list of polling stations shall be forwarded to Council
Branches of Elections Cameroon for posting up at least 8 (eight) days before
the day of election.

II - CONDUCT OF THE POLL
Section 98: (1) Every polling station shall have the electoral registers eligible
to vote. One of such registers shall be used for electors to enter their
signatures. One list shall be posted up at the polling station.
  (2) Every polling station shall have the necessary election material
for the conduct of the poll.
SECTION 99: (1) The Chairperson of the Local Polling Commission shall, at
the start of polling, take note of the time of opening of the poll which they shall
mention in the polling report.
  (2) Before the first elector casts their vote, the Chairperson of the
Local Polling Commission shall publicly open the ballot box to ascertain that it
is empty and has no opening, then lock it under the control of the other
members of the polling station and, where applicable, in the presence of any
other accredited person.
SECTION 100: (1) The election shall be by secret ballot. Uniform and opaque
envelopes shall be used in voting.
  (2) In every polling station, the number of ballot papers of each
candidate or list of candidates as well as envelopes must be more than the
number of registered voters.
SECTION 101 : (1) Any voter whose name is duly entered in the electoral
register shall be entitled to vote.
  (2) However, the right to vote shall be suspended for whoever is
remanded in custody or is detained after conviction by a criminal court.
SECTION 102: (1) No person shall be allowed to vote unless their name
appears on the electoral register of the polling station concerned.
  (2) The provisions of Section 102 (1) above notwithstanding, the
Chairperson and members of the Local Polling Commission shall b e allowed
to vote in the polling station upon producing their voter’s cards.
  (3) In case of appeal by an elector, any decision by the competent
court ordering registration, as evidenced by an Order, shall be tantamount to
registration of the said elector on the electoral register concerned.

[Page 33]
 33
Section 103 : (1) On entering the polling station, the elector shall
produce their voter’s card. They shall also prove their identity by producing
their national identity card.
  (2) The Local Polling Commission may all ow any elector
registered in the polling station whom, for one reason or the other, may be
unable to produce their voter’s card. The Commission shall first check the
elector’s identity as provided for in Section 103 (1) above.
SECTION 104: (1) After having  been identified, every elector shall themself
take an envelope and each of the ballot papers placed at their disposal, and
compulsorily enter the polling booth where they shall make their choice.
  (2) They shall come out of the polling booth and, after s atisfying
the Commission that they hold a single envelope only, shall place such
envelope in the ballot-box.
  (3) The polling booth shall be set up in such manner as to ensure
secrecy of the ballot.
SECTION 105 : (1) Any elector suffering an infirmity or w hose physical
state makes them unable to carry out on their own, any of the operations
described in Sections 103 and 104 above, may enlist the assistance of an
elector of their choice.
  (2) The elector chosen must be registered on the electoral register
of the polling station concerned and shall not be a candidate or representative
of a candidate, list of candidates or political party. They may not assist more
than one elector on polling day.
SECTION 106: (1) The fact that an elector has voted shall be evidenced by
affixing the elector’s signature and finger print using indelible ink on the
relevant column of the electoral register.
(2) Where the elector is unable to sign, the fact that such elector has voted
shall be evidenced by affixing the elector’s fin ger print using indelible ink on
the relevant column of the electoral register.
SECTION 107 : Initialled copies of the electoral register shall be kept by the
Council Branch of Elections Cameroon. In case of dispute, such initialled
copies shall be forwarde d to the Constitutional Council for consultation or to
the competent administrative court, at its instance.

III - COUNTING OF THE VOTES

[Page 34]
 34
SECTION 108 : (1) Once the time set for the close of polls is up, the
Chairperson of the Local Polling Commission shall declare the close of polls.
  (2) No elector who arrives after the close of polls may be allowed
to vote.
  (3) However, any elector who, at the time of closing the polls is
within the premises of the polling station or who has been waiting to enter the
polling station shall be allowed to vote. The report of the Commission shall
mention the time when voting actually ended.
SECTION 109: Vote counting and tallying shall take place in each polling
station immediately after the actual end of voting, in the pres ence of voters
who so desire provided the hall can contain them without obstructing the
counting operation.
SECTION 110 : (1) However, where public peace so warrant, the
Chairperson of the Local Polling Commission shall seal the ballot box, under
the supervision of members of the Local Polling Commission and the forces
of law and order.
  (2) The Chairperson shall thereupon, accompanied by the
members of the Commission, take the ballot -box to the Council Branch of
Elections Cameroon.
  (3) The opening of the  ballot-box and envelopes and the counting
of votes shall be carried out in the presence of the head of the Council
Branch of Elections Cameroon, or their representative and members of the
Local Polling Commission.
SECTION 111: (1) Envelopes shall be checked and opened by members of
the Local Polling Commission assisted by appointed scrutineers.

  (2) The names of the appointed scrutineers shall be entered in the
report of each Local Polling Commission.
SECTION 112: (1) The vote counting procedure shall be as follows:
a) The ballot box shall be opened and the number of envelopes contained
therein checked;
b) One of the scrutineers shall take the ballot paper out of each envelope,
unfold it and hand it to another scrutineer who shall read  it aloud; the
name of the candidate or list of candidates, or the choice “YES” or “NO”
in case of referendum, appearing on the ballot paper shall be recorded
by two scrutineers on specially prepared counting sheets. Where an
envelope contains several ballot papers, such ballot pa pers shall be

[Page 35]
 35
invalid if they are different; they shall count as one vote if they
are identical.
  (2) The result of counting shall not take into account:
 Any ballot paper bearing any signs, marks or signature by which the
elector may be identified;
 Ballot papers contained in envelopes bearing signs of a similar nature
or in envelopes other than those officially made available to electors;
 Any ballot paper other than officially printed ballot papers.
  (3) Ballot papers so declared invalid and, where appli cable,
envelopes containing such ballot papers shall be attached to the report which
shall mention the number of such invalid ballot papers. Ballot papers found in
the ballot box without any envelope and envelopes found empty shall likewise
be regarded as invalid and mentioned in the report. Counting sheets shall be
attached to the report.
SECTION 113: Once counting is over, the results obtained in each polling
station shall be proclaimed.
SECTION 114: Any objections which may be raised by electors at the t ime
of vote counting shall be decided upon by the Local Polling Commission and
shall be recorded in the report.
SECTION 115: (1) The results of the poll shall forthwith be entered into a
report. Such report, which shall be made in as many copies as there a re
members plus 2 (two), shall be closed and signed by all the members.
  (2) A copy of the report shall be handed to each member of the
Local Polling Commission present and having signed it.
  (3) The Chairperson of the Local Polling Commission shall
forward the original copy of the report to the Head of the Council Branch of
Elections Cameroon for filing. The said original copy shall be authentic.
  (4) A copy of the report shall be forwarded, within 48 (forty -eight)
hours following the close of the poll,  to the Chairperson of the Divisional
Supervisory Commission or to the Chairperson of the Council Supervisory
Commission, where necessary.

[Page 36]
 36

PART IV
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO VACANCY OF AND
ELECTION TO THE PRESIDENCY OF THE REPUBLIC

CHAPTER I
TERM OF OFFICE AND POLLING
Section 116: (1) The President of the Republic shall be elected for a term
of office of 7 (seven) years by universal suffrage and by direct, equal and
secret ballot.
  (2) He shall be eligible for re-election.
  (3) He shall be elected by a s ingle-round majority ballot. Voting
shall take place no less than 20 (twenty) days and no more than 50 (fifty)
days before the expiry of the term of office of the incumbent President of the
Republic.
  (4) The candidate having obtained the majority of the votes cast
shall be declared elected.
CHAPTER II
ELIGIBILITY AND INCOMPATIBILITIES
SECTION 117:   (1) Candidates for the office of President of the Republic
must be in full possession of their civic and political rights and must be aged
35 (thirty-five) years and above by the date of election.
  (2) They shall be Cameroonian citizens by birth and show proof of
having resided in Cameroon for an uninterrupted period of at least 12 (twelve)
months and of having their names entered in the electoral register by the date
of election.
 SECTION 118 : (1) All persons who, by their own doing, have
placed themselves in a situation of dependence on or connivance
with a foreign person, organization or power or foreign State shall
not be eligible.

[Page 37]
 37
(2) Ineligibility shal l be established by the Constitutional
Council within 3 (three) days of referral to it, at the behest of any concerned
person or the Legal Department.
SECTION 119 : The office of President of the Republic shall be
incompatible with any other public elective office or professional activity.

CHAPTER III
NOMINATION   OF   CANDIDATES
SECTION 120:  Any candidate wishing to stand for presidential elections
shall declare their candidature through a declaration bearing their
authenticated signature.
SECTION 121:  A candidate may be:
  (1)  Either put forwarded by a political party;
  (2) Or independent, on condition that they are put forward by at
least 300 (three hundred) dignitaries hailing from all the Regions, with 30
signatures from each Region. Persons who qualify to append such signatures
shall be either Members of Parliament or of Trades Chambers, or Regional
Councillors, Municipal Councillors, or First-Class Chiefs.
The said dignitaries shall affix to a candidate’s papers their signatures
authenticated by t he administrative authorities with territorial competence.
Each dignitary may affix their signature only once and for a single candidate.
SECTION 122 : (1) The candidacy papers shall bear the following
information:
- The full name, date and place of birth, occupation and residence of the
candidate;
- The colour, emblem and title chosen for printing ballot papers.
   (2) The candidacy papers shall be accompanied by:
(a) The list of the 300 signatures of dignitaries as required under Section
121 above, where applicable;
(b) A certified copy of the candidate’s birth certificate, no more than 3
(three) months old;
(c) The presentation and nomination papers submitted by the party
sponsoring the candidate, where applicable;

[Page 38]
 38
(d) A declaration whereby the candidate undertakes, on
honour, to abide by the Constitution;
(e) A certificate of non-conviction (Criminal record form No.3), no more
than 3 (three) months old;
(f) A tax or no-tax certificate;
(g) A certificate of nationality;
(h) The original copy of a certificate showing payment of the deposit.
   (3) It shall be forbidden to choose an emblem bearing all the 3
(three) colours, namely GREEN, RED and YELLOW.
SECTION 123 : (1) Candidacy papers shall be submitted in duplicate,
within 5 (five) days of the date of convening of electors.
  (2) Candidacy p apers shall be submitted to the General
Directorate of Elections. They may also be submitted to the Regional
Branches of Elections Cameroon, which shall forward them within 24 (twenty-
four) hours to the General Directorate of Elections.
  (3) A copy thereo f shall be forwarded forthwith to the
Constitutional Council by the candidate or his representative, against an
acknowledgement of receipt.
  (4) Candidacy papers may further be delivered by registered mail
with acknowledgement of receipt, which shall be a ddressed to the General
Directorate of Elections with a copy sent to the Constitutional Council,
provided that such registered letter is received within the time -limit provided
for in Sub-section (1) above.
  (5) Where candidacy papers are submitted, a pro visional receipt
shall be issued. Where they are forwarded by registered mail, the
acknowledgement of receipt shall stand in lieu thereof.
SECTION 124: (1) Each candidate shall pay a deposit of CFA 30  000 000
(Thirty million) francs into the Treasury.
  (2) The Treasury Services shall then issue a certificate, in
triplicate, showing payment of the deposit referred to in Sub -section (1)
above. One of the copies of the certificate shall be forwarded forthwith by the
Treasury Services to the Constitutional Cou ncil. The original and the other
copy shall be handed over to the candidate.
SECTION 125: (1) The Electoral Board may accept or reject a candidacy.
  (2) The Director General of Elections shall notify the person
concerned of the reasoned decision to reject  their candidacy. A copy of the
said decision shall be forwarded forthwith to the Constitutional Council.

[Page 39]
 39
  (3) The decision to reject a candidacy or to publish candidacies
may be appealed against before the Constitutional Council under the
conditions laid down in Sections 128, 129, and 130 below.
SECTION 126: Within no less than 60 (sixty) days to the date of the poll,
the Electoral Board shall draw up and publish the list of candidates. It shall
forthwith notify the Constitutional Council of such list of candidates.
SECTION 127: (1) Where a candidate put forward by a political party dies
before the opening of the election campaign, such candidate may be replaced
on the initiative of the said political party.
  (2) The replacement referred to in Sub -section (1) above may be
possible only where fresh candidacy papers are submitted to the General
Directorate of Elections no later than the 20 th day preceding the day of
election.
  (3) Independent candidates may not be replaced.
SECTION 128: (1) Where a candidat e put forward by a political party is
disqualified by the Constitutional Council after the publication of the list of
candidates, they may be replaced by another candidate of the same political
party. The said candidate must fulfil the conditions of eligib ility laid down by
this law.
  (2) Such replacement must take place within no more than 3
(three) days of the decision of the Constitutional Council.
SECTION 129 : Objections or petitions relating to the rejection or
acceptance of candidates, as well as tho se relating to the colour, initials or
emblem adopted by a candidate may be brought before the Constitutional
Council by any candidate or political party taking part in the election or any
person serving as a Government representative in the said election,  within a
maximum period of 2 (two) days following the publication of the list of
candidates.
Section 130: (1) Objections and petitions shall be filed through ordinary
petitions to the Constitutional Council.
  (2) Such petitions shall not stay execution.
  (3) The petitions shall be recorded by the Constitutional Council.
  (4) Under pain of rejection, petitions shall specify the alleged facts
and means.

[Page 40]
 40
  (5) Petitions shall be notified to all the parties concerned
through any fast means leaving a paper t rail, and posted up at the
Constitutional Council within 24 (twenty -four) hours following the filing
thereof.
  (6) The written evidence of the person concerned shall be
deposited within 24 (twenty four) hours of the notification or posting up of the
petition. The Constitutional Council shall issue an acknowledgement of
receipt thereof.
SECTION 131 : (1) In case of objections or petitions relating to the
rejection or acceptance of candidacies as well as those relating to the colour,
initials or emblem chos en by a candidate, the Constitutional Council, before
which the matter is brought, shall rule within no more than10 (ten) days of the
filing of the petition.
  (2) In case of a petition relating to the colour, initials or emblem
adopted by a candidate, the  Constitutional Council shall assign by priority to
each candidate their habitual colours, initials or emblem by order of seniority
of the political party which put forward the candidate and, as concerns the
other cases, according to the date of submission  of the candidacy papers, as
evidenced by the submission receipt.
  (3) Any decision following a petition against the rejection or
acceptance of a candidacy, as well as that relating to the colour, initials and/
or emblem shall be notified forthwith to the Electoral Board and to the political
parties concerned.
CHAPTER IV
ELECTORAL DISPUTES
SECTION 132: (1) The Constitutional Council shall ensure the regularity of
the presidential election.
(2) The Constitutional Council shall rule on all petitions filed by
any candidate, any political party which took part in the election or any
person serving as a representative of the Administration for the election,
requesting the total or partial cancellation of election operations.
SECTION 133: (1) All petitions filed pursuant to the provisions of Section
132 above must reach the Constitutional Council within no more than 72
(seventy two) hours of the close of the poll.
  (2) The Constitutional Council may, if it deems it necessary, hear
any applicant or request the submission of evidence, against a receipt.

[Page 41]
 41
  (3) Under pain of rejection, the petition shall specify the
alleged facts and means. It shall be posted up within 24 (twenty four) hours of
its submission and notified to the parties concerned who shall be allowed 48
(forty-eight) hours to submit their replies, against a receipt.
SECTION 134: The Constitutional Council may, without prior adversarial
hearing, issue a reasoned decision to reject any petition it considers
inadmissible or to be based solely on objection s which cannot influence the
outcome of the election.
SECTION 135: (1) In the event of cancellation of the elections, notification
thereof shall forthwith be made to the Minister of Territorial Administration and
Elections Cameroon.
  (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 86 of this law, a new
election shall be held within no less than 20 (twenty) days and no more than
40 (forty) days of the date of cancellation.
  (3) The incumbent President of the Republic shall remain in office
up to the election  and swearing-in of the President -elect, and shall convene
the electorate within the time-limit provided for in Sub-section (2) above.
SECTION 136 : The decisions of the Constitutional Council relating to
elections, election results and candidatures shall be final.

CHAPTER V
PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS
SECTION 137 : The Constitutional Council shall adopt and proclaim the
results of the presidential election within no more than15 (fifteen) days of the
close of the poll.
SECTION 138 : (1) Where, after the election,  no candidate is declared
President-elect of the Republic, the incumbent shall remain in office until a
new President is elected and sworn in.
  (2) In such case, a new election shall be held within the time -limit
provided for under Section 135 above, from  the expiry of the legal time -limit
for the proclamation of the election results.
SECTION 139: (1) The election results shall be published according to the
procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official Gazette  in English and
French.

[Page 42]
 42
  (2) The publicati on provided for under Sub -section (1)
above shall apply to any decision by the Constitutional Council to modify or
cancel the said results.
CHAPTER VI
OATH TAKING
SECTION 140: (1) The President-elect shall assume office once he or she
takes the oath within  no less than15 (fifteen) days of the proclamation of the
results by the Constitutional Council.
  (2) He shall take oath of office before the Cameroonian people in
the presence of Members of Parliament, the Constitutional Council and the
Supreme Court mee ting in solemn session in the manner and words
prescribed hereinunder:
a. The President of the National Assembly shall administer the oath
following a short address which he shall conclude in the following
established form:
“Mr. President of the Republic,
Do you pledge yourself on your honour to faithfully perform the duties
entrusted to you by the people, and do you solemnly swear before God
and all men to devote all your efforts to preserving, protecting and
defending the Constitution and the laws of the Rep ublic of Cameroon,
to watch over the commonwealth of the Nation, and to uphold and
defend the unity, integrity and independence of the Cameroon
Fatherland?”
b. The President-elect, standing, raising his right hand and facing the
Members of Parliament, the Constitutional Council and the Supreme
Court shall pledge himself by answering:
 “I SO DO SWEAR.”
SECTION 141: (1) Five (5) authentic original copies shall be made of the
oath taking, signed by the President of the National Assembly and co -signed
by the Presidents of the Senate, the Constitutional Council and the Supreme
Court.
  (2) One of the originals of the oath -taking deed referred to in Sub-
section (1) above shall be kept at the Secretariat General of the National
Assembly, 3 (three) original copies shall be deposited with and kept as record
or minutes of the respective registries of the Senate, the Constitutional
Council and the Supreme Court.

[Page 43]
 43
  (3) One original copy shall be handed over to the President of
the Republic.

CHAPTER VII
VACANCY OF THE OFFICE OF
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
SECTION 142: Where the Presidency of the Republic becomes vacant as
a result of death, resignation or permanent unavailability ascertained by the
Constitutional Council, the powers of the interim President of the Republic
shall be exercised as of right until the election of a new president by the
President of the Senate. Where the latter is also unable to exercise the
powers, they shall be exercised by the Vice -President following the order of
precedence in the Senate.
SECTION 143: (1) In the event of vacancy of the Office of President of the
Republic due to resignation, the resigning President shall so inform the nation
in a message.
  (2) The President of the Republic shall then tender his resignation
to the President of t he Constitutional Council, who shall send a copy thereof
to the President of the Senate.
  (3) The message referred to in Sub -section (1) above shall be
published according to the procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official
Gazette in English and French.
  (4) The interim President of the Republic shall exercise his duties
in accordance with Section 142 above.
SECTION 144 : (1) The interim President of the Republic, that is, the
President of the Senate or his Vice, may neither amend the Constitution no r
reshuffle the Government. He may not organize a referendum or be a
candidate in the Presidential election.
  (2) However, in case of necessity related to the organization of the
presidential election, the acting President of the Republic may, upon
consultation with the Constitutional Council, reshuffle the Government.
SECTION 145: (1) The permanent unavailability of the President of the
Republic shall be ascertained by a majority of 2/3 (two-thirds) of the members
of the Constitutional Council.

[Page 44]
 44
  (2) Such  unavailability shall be referred to the Constitution
Council by the President of the National Assembly under the conditions laid
down by regulation.
  (3) The declaration of the vacancy of the office of President of the
Republic as duly ascertained in acc ordance with Sub -sections (1) and (2)
above, shall be published by the Constitutional Council according to the
procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official Gazette  in English and
French.
SECTION 146: In the cases referred to in Sections 143 and 145 ab ove,
the poll for the election of the new President of the Republic must be held no
less than 20 (twenty) days and no more than 120 (one hundred and twenty)
days of the vacancy of the office.

CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 147: (1) The deposit shall be refunded by the Public Treasury:
 Either to the candidate who withdraws their candidacy prior to the
printing of ballot papers, upon presentation of a receipt of payment of
such deposit and a certificate of withdrawal of candidacy duly
established by the Director General of Elections; or
 To the elected candidate or candidate who obtained at least 10% of
valid votes cast. In such case, the deposit shall be refunded upon
presentation of a certificate of valid votes cast, issued by the
Constitutional Council and having the value of a payment order; or
  (2) In cases other than those specified above, the deposit shall
remain in the Treasury.

[Page 45]
 45

PART V
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO THE ELECTION OF MEMBERS OF
PARLIAMENT

CHAPTER I
TERM OF OFFICE AND POLLING

SECTION 148.- (1) Members of Parliament shall be elected for a term of 5 (five)
years by universal suffrage and direct and secret ballot.

                           (2) They shall be eligible for re-election.

                          (3) All th e seats in the National Assembly shall be renewed
every 5 (five) years. Elections shall be held not later than 40 (forty) days to the
expiry of the term of office of Members of Parliament.

                              (4) The term of office of Members of  Parliament shall
commence on the day of the session held as of right following the election.

                              (5) The National Assembly shall meet as of right in ordinary
session on the second Tuesday following the proclamation of results o f the
election of Members of Parliament by the Constitutional Council.

SECTION 149.- (1) The division shall constitute an electoral constituency.

                         (2) However, certain electoral constituencies could be warded on
the grounds of the ir peculiar situation by a decree of the President of the
Republic.

SECTION 150.-(1) The National Assembly shall have 180 (one hundred and
eighty) members.

                        (2) A decree by the President of the Republic shall fix the number
of members representing each constituency.

SECTION 151.-(1) Voting shall be for a list of candidates without voters
indicating any preference of candidates nor transferring candidates from one list
to another.

                       (2) Each political party exi sting legally and willing to take part in
the election in a constituency shall submit a complete list having the same
number of candidates chosen from its members as the seats to be filled.

[Page 46]
 46
                      (3) Each list shall take into consideratio n the various
sociological components of the constituency concerned.  It shall also take into
consideration gender aspects.

SECTION 152.-(1) Members of Parliament shall be elected through a mixed
single round ballot, comprising a majority system and a pro portional
representation system.

                        (2) However, in constituencies having only one seat, voting shall
be for a single candidate.

                         (3) After the ballot:

(a) In single member constituencies, the candidate with a ma jority of the
votes cast shall be declared elected ; should there be a tie, the eldest
candidate shall be declared elected ;

(b) In constituencies where the list system is applicable :
- the list that obtains an absolute majority of the votes cast shall win all
the seats available;
- if no list obtains an absolute majority of the votes cast, the seats shall be
shared as follows:
* the list with the highest number of votes shall be allocated half of the
seats rounded off, if need be, to the nearest whole number abo ve ;
where there is a tie between 2 (two) or more lists, the number of seats
rounded off to the nearest whole number above shall be allocated to the
list with the highest average age;
* the remaining seats shall be allocated to the other lists through the
application of proportional representation to the lists with the highest
votes ; where there is a tie in the number of votes, the seat(s) shall be
allocated to the list with the highest average age.

                           (4) Lists which obtain less t han 5 % of the votes cast in the
constituency concerned shall not be eligible for the proportional distribution of
seats.

                          (5) Seats shall be allocated to candidates in the order in which
they appear on each list.

SECTION 153.- For every seat to be filled, there shall be a substantive candidate
and an alternate candidate, both of whom shall go before the electorate at the
same time.

[Page 47]
 47
SECTION 154.- After their election, and in all cases of vacancy other than
the death of the substa ntive member, the alternate shall take the seat of the
Member of Parliament at the National Assembly until the expiry of the latter’s
term.

SECTION 155.- (1) Where one or more seats become vacant in a constituency
either because of the death, resignation of the substantive or alternate member,
or for any other reason, by -elections shall be held within a period of 12 (twelve)
months following the occurrence of the vacancy.

                        (2) By-elections shall be held in the electoral constituency  in the
manner specified in Sections 153 and 154 above.

                      (3) Where a seat becomes definitively vacant in an electoral
constituency with many seats, there shall be a single ballot.

                     (4) Only political parties that took part in the general elections in the
constituency shall be allowed to take part in the by-elections.

                   (5) No by -election shall be held if the vacancy occurs less than a
year before the end of the legislative period.

CHAPTER II
QUALIFICATION OF CANDIDATES

SECTION 156.- Any Cameroonian citizen, of either sex, who enjoys the right to
vote and is entered on electoral registers, is aged 23 (twenty -three) years at the
date of the election and can read and write English or French can be nominated
as a candidate for election to the National Assembly.

SECTION 157.- Any lien who has acquired Cameroonian nationality by way of
naturalization shall be eligible only after a prescription period of 10 (ten) years,
with effect from the date of acquisition of such nationality.

SECTION 158.- (1) No person shall be eligible for election where, by virtue of his
own act, he has placed himself in a position of dependency on an alien, a foreign
organization, power or State or is an intelligence agent thereof.

                        (2) On application of the relevant government service or any
interested person(s), such ineligibility shall be  established by the Constitutional
Council.

SECTION 159.- (1) All persons serving in defence and territorial secur ity
services, especially in the security and police forces, and members of the armed
forces and the like shall likewise be ineligible and may not stand for election to

[Page 48]
 48
the National Assembly during the discharge of their duties and during the 6
(six) months following the termination of their service by resignation, dismissal,
transfer or by any other manner.

                       (2) Such ineligibility shall apply, under the same conditions, to
persons who are performing or have performed the duties referr ed to in sub-
section (1) above for a period of at least 6 (six) months, even if they are not or
had not been on the regular strength.

SECTION 160.-(1) Public servants elected to the office of Member of Parliament
shall, as of right, be seconded to the Nat ional Assembly for the whole term of
their office.

                      (2) For State employees governed by the Labour Code  and for
private sector employees, their employment contract shall be suspended for their
whole term of office.

SECTION 161.-  (1) Every member and every alternate shall meet the conditions
for eligibility throughout his term of office.

                          (2) The seat in the National Assembly of a member or of an
alternate shall automatically become vacant if, after the procl amation of the
results of election, it is established that such member or alternate was
ineligible or if during his term of office he is no longer eligible for membership
under the conditions laid down in this law.

                       (3) The seat of  a Member of Parliament shall be declared vacant
by the Constitutional Council, at the behest of the bureau of the National
Assembly. That of the alternate member shall be automatic.

                      (4) The seat in the National Assembly of any membe r or alternate
who, during his term of office, is expelled or resigns from his party, shall likewise
become vacant.

                     (5) Where a Member of Parliament is convicted and declared
ineligible after  an election the Constitutional Council  shall establish such
vacancy.

CHAPTER III
INCOMPATIBILITIES

SECTION 162.- (1) The office of Member of Parliament shall be incompatible
with the office of member of Government or of persons ranking as such , member
of the Constitutional Council and of member of the Economic and Social Council.

[Page 49]
 49
                       (2) The office of Member of Parliament shall further be
incompatible with the office of Senator, mayor, government delegate to a city
council, president of a regional council, with any other non -elective public office
and with the duties of president of a consular chamber, board chairperson or with
the status of wage earner in a public establishment or public and semi-public
enterprise.

SECTION 163.-(1) The occupation of one of the posts referred to in Section 162
above shall render the parliamentary seat vacant.

                       (2) No Member of Parliament shall cause or allow his name to be
followed by any reference to his capacity as Parliamentarian in any
advertisement concerning a financial, industrial or commercial undertaking.

CHAPTER IV
NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES

SECTION 164.- (1) Candidatures shall, within 15 (fifteen) days from the
convening of the electorate, be made out in nomination paper in triplicate,
bearing the legalized signature of candidates.

                   (2) Such nomination paper shall be submitted and registered ,
against a receipt, at the General Directorate of Elections or at the divisional
branch of Elections Cameroon of the constituency concerned. A copy there of
shall immediately be sent to the Constitutional Council by the candidate or his
representative, against acknowledgement of receipt.

                        (3) Nomination papers submitted at the divisional branch of
Elections Cameroon shall be sent forthwith to the General Directorate of
Elections.

              (4) The nomination paper shall contain the following particulars:

(a) the full name, date and place of birth, filiations, occupation and
residence of candidates;
(b) the name of the list and the political party sponsoring such list;
(c) the symbol selected for the purpose of printing ballot papers or of
identifying the party;
(d) the name of the representative, whether he is a candidate or not, and
the address of his residence;
(e) evidence of representation o f sociological components of the
constituency in drawing up the list;

[Page 50]
 50

(f) evidence of consideration of gender in drawing up the list.

                  (5) Any emblem comprising all of the following 3 (three) colours:
green, red, yellow ; shall be forbidden.

SECTION 165.-  The nomination paper shall include for each candidate,
substantive or alternate:

(a)  a copy of his birth certificate, not more than 3 (three) months old;
(b)  a certificate of nationality ;
(c)  a criminal record (Bulletin No. 3), not more than three months old;
(d)  a declaration by which the substantive or alternate candidate testifies,
on his honour, that his name appears only on that list and that he is not
the object of any of the disqualifications provided for by this law;
(e)  a tax certificate or a tax exemption certificate;
(f)  an attestation of registration on electoral registers ;
(g)  the original receipt of payment of deposit ;
(h)  an attestation by which the political party sponsors the person as
candidate.

SECTION 166.- (1) The substantive candidate and his alternate shall both pay a
deposit into the State Treasury in the amount of 5000 000 (five million) CFA
francs, according to the form and terms of Section 122(2) of this law.

                        (2) The deposit shall be refunded by the State Trea sury in the
cases provided for by Section 147 of this law.

SECTION 167.- The provisions of Sections 125, 126, 129, 130 and 131 of this
law relating to the nomination of candidates, disputes and complaints in respect
of rejection or acceptance of candidatu res as well as those on colour, initials or
emblem chosen by a candidate or list of candidates shall be applicable to the
election of Members of Parliament.

CHAPTER V
ELECTORAL DISPUTES AND PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS

SECTION 168.- (1) The Constitutional Co uncil shall ensure the regularity of the
election of Members of Parliament. It shall proclaim the results within a maximum
period of 20 (twenty) days with effect from the date of closure of pools.

[Page 51]
 51
                        (2) Electoral disputes and organiz ation of a new election, as
the case may be, shall be carried out in pursuance of  the provisions of Sections
132 to 136 of this law.

                       (3) The report on the conduct of electoral operations and
proclamation of results shall be prepare d by the Constitutional Council in four
copies. It shall file the original copy and forward the other copies to the Ministry
in charge of territorial administration, the National Assembly and the Electoral
Board.

PART VI
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO THE ELECTION
 OF MUNICIPAL COUNCILLORS

CHAPTER I
TERM OF OFFICE AND POLLING

SECTION 169.- (1) (1) Municipal councillors shall be elected for a term of 5 (five)
years by universal suffrage and direct and secret ballot.

                          (2) They shall be eligible for re-election.

         (3) The election shall take place 20 (twenty) days before the
expiry of the term of office of municipal councillors.

                        (4) The term of office of municipal councillors shall commence on
the day of the first session held as of right following the proclamation of the
results of the election . The said session shall hold on the second Tuesday
following the proclamation of results.

SECTION 170.-  (1) All the seats of municipal councillors shall be renewed every
5 (five) years at the same date.

                          (2) However, if need be, the President of the Republic may, by
decree, extend or abridge the term of office of municipal councillors for a period
not exceeding 18 (eighteen) months, after  consultation with the Government and
the Bureau of the Senate.

SECTION 171.- (1) Voting shall be for a list of candidates without voters
indicating any preference of candidates nor transferring candidates from one list
to another.
                          (2) Each council shall constitute an electoral constituency.

[Page 52]
 52
                         (3) Each list shall take into consideration:
-  the various sociological components of the constituency concerned;
- gender aspects.

SECTION 172.- (1) Municipal councillors shall be elected through a mixed single
round ballot, comprising a majority system and a proportional representation
system.

                         (2) After the ballot :

a) the list that obtains an absolute majority of the votes cast shall win a ll
the seats available ;
b) if no list obtains an absolute majority of the votes cast, the seats shall be
shared as follows:
- the list with the highest number of votes shall be allocated half of the seats
rounded off, if need be, to the nearest whole number a bove ; where there
is a tie between 2 (two) or more lists, the number of seats rounded off to
the nearest whole number above shall be allocated to the list with the
highest average age;
- the remaining seats shall be allocated to the other lists, including t he list
with a relative majority, through the application of proportional
representation to the lists with the highest votes ; where there is a tie in the
number of votes, the seat(s) shall be allocated to the list with the highest
average age.

                      (3) Lists which obtain less than 5% of the votes cast in the
constituency concerned shall not be eligible for the proportional distribution of
seats.

                     (4) Seats shall be allocated to candidates in the order in which they
appear on each list.

SECTION 173.- (1) The number of municipal councillors shall be fixed as follows:

- councils with less than 50 000 ( fifty thousand) inhabitants: 25 (twenty-five)
councillors;
- councils with from 50  000 (fifty thousand) to 100  000 (one hun dred
thousand) inhabitants : 31 (thirty-one) councillors;
- councils with from 100 001 (one hundred thousand and one) to 200  000
(two hundred thousand) inhabitants: 35 (thirty-five) councillors;
- councils with from 200  001 (two hundred thousand and one) to 30 0 000
(three hundred thousand) inhabitants: 41 (forty-one) councillors;

[Page 53]
 53
- councils with more than 300 000 (three hundred thousand)
inhabitants: 61 (sixty-one) councillors.

                       (2) A decree of the President of the Republic shall fix the nu mber
of municipal councillors by council, on the basis of the official population census
immediately preceding the municipal elections.

SECTION 174.-(1) By-elections shall be held where a municipal council loses at
least two-fifths of its members. In such  case, only political parties that submitted
a list of candidates for the general municipal elections shall be allowed to submit
an additional list of candidates.

                     (2) No by-election shall be held if the vacancy referred to in sub-
section (1) above occurs less than a year before the end of the term of office of
municipal councillors.

CHAPTER II
QUALIFICATION OF CANDIDATES AND INCOMPATIBILITIES

SECTION 175.- (1) Any Cameroonian citizen, of either sex, who enjoys the right
to vote, is entered on electoral registers, is aged 23 (twenty -three) years at the
date of the election , can read and write English or French and shows proof of
effective residence of at least 6 (six) months within the area of the council
concerned can be nominated as a candidate for municipal elections.

                        (2) Persons not resident within the area of the council concerned
may stand for municipal elections if they have a place of abode therein.

(3) Any lien who has acquired Cameroonian national ity by way of
naturalization shall be eligible only after a prescription period of 10 (ten) years,
with effect from the date of acquisition of such nationality.

SECTION 176.- (1) No person shall be eligible for election if, by virtue of his own
act, he ha s placed himself in a position of dependenc y on an alien, a foreign
organization, power or State or is an intelligence agent thereof.

  (2) On application of the relevant government service or any
interested person(s), such ineligibility shall be establi shed by the competent
administrative court within 3 (three) days following referral of the matter.

SECTION 177.- (1) All persons serving in defence and territorial security
services, especially in the security and police forces, and members of the armed
forces and the like shall likewise be ineligible and may not stand for election to

[Page 54]
 54
the office of municipal councillor during the discharge of their duties and
during the 6 (six) months following the termination of their service by resignation,
dismissal, transfer or by any other manner.

   (2) Such ineligibility shall apply, under the same conditions, to
persons who are performing or have performed the duties referred to in sub -
section (1) above for a period of at least 6 (six) months, even if they are not or
had not been on the regular strength.

SECTION 178.- (1) The seat of a municipal councillor shall automatically become
vacant if, after the proclamation of the results of election, it is established that
such councillor was ineligible or if during his term of office he is no longer eligible
for membership under the conditions laid down in this law.

                        (2) The seat of a municipal councillor who, during his term of
office, resigns or is expelled from h is party, shall likewise automatically become
vacant.

                      (3) The vacancy shall be declared, after a deliberation of the
municipal council, by an order of the Minister in charge of local and regional
authorities. The said order may be challenged before the competent
administrative court.

SECTION 179.- (1) The office of Governor, Secretary -General and Inspector -
General at the governor’s office, Senior Divisional Officer, Sub -Divisional and
their dep uties shall be incompatible during the tenure of such office with the
office of municipal councillor within the administrative unit of their jurisdiction.

                        (2) The office of municipal councillor shall likewise be
incompatible with the following positions held in the same area of jurisdiction:

- police officer, gendarme, serviceman, prison administration officer and
persons ranking as such;
- secretary-general of a council, municipal revenue collector and municipal
service head;
- legal and judicial officer.

SECTION 180.- (1) A municipal councillor who, subsequent to election, becomes
ineligible for office as provided by this law, shall have to opt for his municipal
office or the function concerned. Where no choice is made known within 15
(fifteen) days following accession to t he said function, he shall be considered to

[Page 55]
 55
have resigned by an order of the Minister in charge of local and regional
authorities.

        (2) No candidate shall be on more than 1 (one) list, nor be
member of more than 1 (one) municipal council.

CHAPTER III
NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES

SECTION 181.- (1) Candidatures shall, within 15 (fifteen) days from the
convening of the electorate, be made out in nomination paper in 3 (three) copies,
bearing the legalized signature of candidates and submitted at the council branch
of Elections Cameroon against a receipt.

                           (2) The nomination paper shall contain the following particulars:

(a)  the full name, date and place of birth, filiation  and occupation of
candidates;
(b)  the name of the list and the political party sponsoring such list;
(c)  the symbol selected for the purpose of printing ballot papers or of
identifying the party;
(d)  the name of the representative of the list, whether he is a candidate or not,
and the address of his residence;
(e)  evidence of representation of sociological components of the constituency
in drawing up the list;
(f) evidence of consideration of gender aspects in drawing up the list.

                       (3) Any emblem comprising all of the following 3 (three) colours  :
green, red, yellow ; shall be forbidden.

SECTION 182.- The nomination paper shall include for each candidate :

(a)  a copy of his birth certificate, not more than 3 (three) months old;
(b)  a certificate of nationality ;
(c)  a criminal record (Bulletin No 3), not more than three months old;
(d)  a declaration by which the candidate testifies, on his honour, that his name
appears only on that list and that he is not the object of any of the
disqualifications provided for by this law;
(e)  a tax certificate or a tax exemption certificate;
(f) an attestation of registration on electoral registers ;
(g)  an attestation of abode or residence in the council concerned, issued by
the competent administrative authority;

[Page 56]
 56
(h)  the original receipt of payment of deposit ;
(i) an attestation by which the politi cal party sponsors the person as
candidate.

SECTION 183.-  Each candidate shall pay a deposit into the Public  Treasury in
the amount of 100 000 (one hundred  thousand) CFA francs. A certificate of
payment of the deposit shall be issued by the treasury services in three copies.

SECTION 184.- The following shall be rejected :

- incomplete lists;
- lists not containing the documents and items referred to in this law ;
- lists including candidates who are not members of the party concerned.

SECTION 185.- (1) The c ouncil branch of Elections Cameroon shall, within 5
(five) days following the submission, ensure that the list of candidates conform s
with the provisions of this law.

                             (2) In any case, it shall, within the time limit referred to in sub-
section (1) above, forward to the Director -General of Elections a ll nomination
papers received, including any observations.

SECTION 186.- After submission of lists no withdrawal of candidates or
modification of the nomination of candidates shall be allowed.

SECTION 187.- The Electoral Board shall draw up  and publish the list s of
candidates at least 60 (sixty) days before the date of the poll.

SECTION 188.- If a candidate whose name appears on a list dies or is
disqualified, he may be replaced, not later than 30 (thirty) days to the opening of
the poll by another candidate, in accordance with the procedure for the
nomination of candidates.

SECTION 189.- (1) The decision to accept or reject a list of candidates may be
challenged before the compet ent administrative court by a candidate, the
representative of the list concerned or of any other list  or by an e lector whose
name appear on the electoral register of the council concerned.

                           (2) Disputes or complaints shall be filed by simple petition within
5 (five) days following the publication of lists of candidates.

SECTION 190.- (1) The competent administrative court shall rule within 5 (five)
days following the filing of the petition.

[Page 57]
 57
                          (2) The d ecision of the competent administrative court shall
be notified immediately to the Electora l Board of Elections Cameroon for
enforcement and to the other parties concerned.

CHAPTER IV
COUNTING OF VOTES AND
 PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS

SECTION 191.- (1) A cou ncil supervisory commission shall be set up in each
council, composed as follows :

Chairperon : a personality appointed by the Director-General of Elections.

Members :

- 3 (three) representatives of the a dministration, appointed by the Senior
Divisional Officer;
- 1 (one) representative of each political party taking part in the polls;
- 3 (three) representatives of Elections Cameroon, appointed by the
Director-General of Elections.

                       (2) The composition of Council Supervisory Commissions shall be
established by the Director-General of Elections.

SECTION 192.- The Council Supervisory C ommission shall be responsible for
the centralization, verification of vote counts , on the basis of reports and
documents forwarded by local polling commissions. It shall, as the case may be,
correct, review or cancel the said reports.

SECTION 193.- (1) The Council Supervisory Commission  shall proclaim the
results of municipal elections in the electoral constituency concerned within 72
(seventy-two) hours following the close of the polls.

                             (2) The proceedings of the Council Supervisory Commission
shall be minuted in a report signed by all commission members present.

                            (3) A copy of the said report sha ll be forwarded to the Senior
Divisional Officer of the jurisdiction for on -ward transmission to the Minister in
charge of local and regional authorities. Another copy shall be sent to the
General Directorate of Elections.

CHAPTER V
ELECTORAL DISPUTES

[Page 58]
 58
SECTION 194.- (1) Any elector, candidate or person acting in the
capacity of a government election officer may petition for the cancellation of
elections in the council concerned before the competent administrative court.

                         (2) Disputes shall be a simple petition filed within 5 (five) days
following the proclamation of results by the Council Supervisory Commission.

                        (3) The competent administrative court shall give a ruling within
40 (forty) days from the day the petition was filed.

SECTION 195.- (1) The municipal councillor whose election is challenged shall
remain in office until a final decision is issued.

                          (2) Where all or part of the election is finally cancelled, by-
elections shall be held within 60 (sixty) days following the cancellation.

                        (3) Only the lists of candidates submitted during the general
municipal elections shall be allowed to take part in the by-elections.

CHAPTER VI
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SECTION 196.- (1) The deposit shall be returned to the candidate:

- who is declared ineligible before the printing of ballot papers;
- whose candidature is definitively disqualified ;
- whose list obtained at least 5% of votes cast in the council concerned. In
this case, the copy of the results proclamation report issued by the
Council Supervisory Commission shall entail order to pay.

(2) The deposit referred to in sub -section (1) above may subsequently be
collected by the representative of the candidate or list of candidates.

         (3) In all cases other than those mentioned in sub-section (1) above, the
deposit shall be retained by the Public Treasury.

PART VII
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO REFERENDUMS

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

[Page 59]
 59
SECTION 197.- The President of the Republic may, after consulting with the
President of the Constitutional Council, the President of the National Assembly
and the President of the Senate, submit to a referendum any reform bill which,
although normally reserved to the legislative power, could have profound
repercussions on the future of the Nation and national institutions.

 This shall apply in particular to:

- bills to organize public authorities or to amend the Constitution;
- bills to ratify international agreements or treatie s having particularly
important consequences;
- certain reform bills relating to laws on persons and property.

SECTION 198.- The bill submitted to a referendum shall be appended to the
decree to convene electors. The said bill shall be widely disseminated.

SECTION 199.- The bill submitted to a referendum shall be adopted by a
majority of votes cast.

SECTION 200.- The provisions of Sections 19 7 and 19 8 above shall equally
apply to bills and private members’ bills on the amendment of the Constitution
submitted to a referendum.

CHAPTER II
REFERENDUM CAMPAIGN

SECTION 201.- The provisions of Sections 87 to 95 above shall be applicable to
the referendum campaign, subject to those of this Chapter.

SECTION 202.- (1) The following may apply to take part in the referendum
campaign:

- political parties represented at the N ational Assembly and/or the
Senate;
- political parties which obtained at least 5% of votes cast in at least
one constituency during the last election of Members of Parliament
and/or Senators.

 (2) The application referred to in sub-section (1) above shall indicate:

- the full address of the political party;
- the full name and domicile of the legal representative of the
political party;

[Page 60]
 60
- the “YES” or “NO” vote on the bill submitted
to the referendum.

SECTION 203.- (1) Applications to take part in the referendum campaign shall
bear the legalized signature of the legal representative of the political party and
must be submitted together with the original of the receipt for payment into the
Public Treasury of a deposit fixed at 1 000 000 (one million) CFA francs.

                       (2)  Applications shall be submitted in 2 (two) copies to the
General Directorate of Elections Cameroon within 15 (fifteen) days following the
convening of electors. A copy  of the application shall be forwarded immediately
to the Constitutional Council by the legal representative of the party against
acknowledgement of receipt.

SECTION 204.- (1) The Electoral Board may accept or reject any application to
take part in the referendum campaign. The legal representative of the party shall
be notified of a reasoned decision to accept or reject an application. This
decision shall be minuted in a report which shall be forwarded immediately to the
Constitutional Council.

                         (2) An appeal may be lodged before the Constitutional Council
against the decision to reject or accept an application, in accordance with the
conditions and time limits fixed in Sections 132, 133 and 134 of this law.

CHAPTER III
REFERENDUM OPERATIONS

SECTION 205.- The ballot papers made available to voters shall be of different
colours and respectively bear, in identical characters, the words “YES” or “NO”.

SECTION 206.- Voters shall cast “YES” for or “NO” against the bill submitted to
the referendum.

SECTION 207.- The other referendum operations shall be conducted in
accordance with Sections 98 to 107 of this law.

SECTION 208.- The provisions of Sections 6 8 and 69 of this law shall apply for
the counting of votes.

CHAPTER IV
REFERENDUM DISPUTES

SECTION 209- (1) The Constitutional Council shall ensure the regularity of
referendums.

[Page 61]
 61
                            (2) It shall examine and give final ruling on all referendum
complaints and disputes.

SECTION 210.- Any complaint relating to t he regularity of a referendum may be
referred to the Constitutional Council by the President of the Republic, the
President of the National Assembly, the President of the Senate, one -third of
Members the National Assembly or one-third of Senators, in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 133 and 134 above.

SECTION 211.- Where the Constitutional Council has established the existence
of irregularities in the conduct of the referendum, it may, considering the gravity
of such irregularities, maintain the results or declare them wholly or partly null
and void.

CHAPTER V
PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS

SECTION 212.- (1) The Constitutional Council shall proclaim referendum results
within 15 (fifteen) days following the date of closing of the poll.

                           (2) It shall prepare a report on the results in two copies, file the
original and forward the other copy to the President of the Republic.

SECTION 213.- (1) The referendum bill shall be adopted where, at the end of the
referendum, “YES” carries the majority of the valid votes cast.

                        (2) The President of the Republic shall enact the law adopted
within 15 (fifteen) days following the transmission of the results proclamation
report.

                      (3) The law shall be preceded by the following:

“The Cameroonian people have adopted by referendum of…….., the
President of the Republic hereby enacts the law set forth below”.

PART VIII
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE ELECTION OF SENATORS

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

SECTION 214.- (1) Each Region shall be represented in the Senate by 10 (ten)
senators, 7 (seven) of whom shall be elected by indirect universal suffrage on a

[Page 62]
 62
regional basis and 3 (three) appointed by decree of the President of
the Republic.

                          (2) Senators shall serve a term of 5 (five) years.

                          (3) Senators shall be eligible for re-election.

                          (4) The term of the appointed senators shall be renewable.

SECTION 215.-(1) The term of se nators shall commence on the day of the
ordinary session following the election, being the expiry date of the term of the
incumbent senators.

                       (2) The Senate shall meet as of right in ordinary session on the
third Tuesday following t he proclamation of the results of senatorial elections by
the Constitutional Council.

                     (3) The decree specified under Section 214 (1) above shall be
published within 10 (ten) days following the proclamation of results by the
Constitutional Council.

SECTION 216.-(1) The entire Senate shall be renewed every 5 (five) years.

                           (2) Senatorial elections shall be held no later than 40 (forty)
days to the expiry of the current term of office.

CHAPTER II
POLLING

SECTION 217- (1) Each Region shall make up a constituency.

                        (2) Senatorial elections shall be by list system, with no changing
of the serial order of candidate's names or vote splitting.

SECTION 218.- (1) Senatorial elections shall be a mixed single ballot,
comprising a majority system and a proportionate representation system.

                         (2) Every political party taking part in the election shall present a
full list of 7 (seven) candidates selected from among its members. For each seat,
there shall be a substantive candidate and his alternate, both of whom shall
appear before the Electoral College at the same time.

                        (3) The composition of each list must reflect:
-  the various sociological components of the Region;
-  gender aspects.

[Page 63]
 63
                        (4) Where a list obtains an absolute majority of the votes
cast, it shall be declared the winner of the elections, filling all 7 (seven) seats.

                       (5) Where no list obtains an absolute majority of the vote cast, the
list with a relative majority shall be awarded half of the seats to be filled rounded
up to the next whole number, that is, 4 (four) seats.

                      (6) In case of a tie among winning lists, the 4 (four) seats shall be
shared equally among the said lists ; where applicable, the remaining seat shall
be awarded to the list with the highest age average.

                    (7) After the sharing of the seats as stipulated in sub-sections (4),
(5) and (6) above, the remaining 3 (three) seats shall be shared amongst all the
lists, including those that obtained a relative majority in proportionate
representation, following the highest remainder rule. List with less than 5% of the
votes cast in the Region shall be excluded from the sharing.

                  (8) Seats shall be awarded to candidates in the order in which they
appear on each list.

              (9) Where several lists have the same average for the award of the last
seat, the seat shall be aw arded to the list having obtained the highest number of
votes. Where there is a tie in the number of votes obtained, the seat shall be
awarded to the eldest candidate.

SECTION 219.- (1) In case of death of a n elected Senator and in compliance
with the provisions of Section 155 above, by-elections shall be held in the Region
concerned.

                         (2) By-elections shall be held under the conditions stipulated in
Section 218 above. However, where there is only one vacant seat to be filled, a
single ballot uninominal majority election shall be held.

                       (3) In case of death of an appointed Senator, at the behest of the
President of the Senate, a new Senator shall be appointed to complete his term.

CHAPTER III
QUALIFICATION OF CANDIDATES
 AND INCOMPATIBILITIES

SECTION 220.- (1) Candidates for the office of Senator, as well as the
personalities appointed to the said office must have reached the age of 40 (forty)
by the date of election or appointment.

[Page 64]
 64
                           (2) The candidate must be of Cameroonian nationality and
must provide evidence of effective res idence in the territory of the R egion
concerned.

SECTION 221.- The other qualifications of candidates and incompatibilities shall
be the same as those fixed under Sections 156 to 163 above.

CHAPTER IV
ELECTORAL COLLEGE

SECTION 222.- (1) Senators shall be elected in each R egion by an electoral
college comprising regional and municipal councillors.

                         (2) Regional and municipal council lors whose election is
contested shall exercise their voting right, pending a final ruling by the competent
court

CHAPTER V
ELECTORAL REGISTERS

SECTION 223- (1) In each R egion, a list of senatorial electors comprising
regional and municipal councilors shall be drawn up and updated by the regional
branch of Elections Cameroon.

                       (2) The list shall feature in alphabetical order, each elector's full
name, date and place of birth, type of elective office, profession and domicile or
place of residence.

SECTION 224.- (1) On publication of the decree convening the Electoral College,
the list of senatorial electors shall be updated

                        (2) The updated list of senatorial electors shall, where applicable,
show the addit ions and deletions resulting notably from death, loss of voting
rights, by -elections and various cases of ineligibility and disqualification for
membership as provided by law.

                      (3) The updated list of senatorial electors shall be publ ished at
least 30 (thirty) days before the voting date. It may be copied or notified to any
person on request.

CHAPTER VI
VOTER CARDS

[Page 65]
 65
SECTION 225.- (1) Senatorial electors shall each receive a registration
card which must feature their full name, date a nd place of birth, photograph,
finger print s, type of elective office, filiation, profession, domicile or place of
residence.

             (2) The abovementioned registration cards shall be used only during
senatorial elections.

SECTION 226.-(1) Registration cards shall be distributed by the divisional
branches of Elections Cameroon, within the 2 0 (twenty) days preceding the
elections.

                        (2) Cards not distributed shall remain at disposal of the ir holders
until the close of the poll at the divisional branch of Elections Cameroon.

CHAPTER VII
POLLING STATIONS

SECTION 227- (1) Voting shall be conducted in the headquarters of each
division.

        (2) Members of the electoral  college, under pain of loss of their
voting right, shall be bound to take part in the polls.

(3) However, where unavoidably absent, a member of the electoral
college may issue a proxy to another member. No member of the electoral
college shall have more than one proxy.

                  (4) The State shall defray the costs relating to the participation of
members of the Electoral College in the polls, in accordance with the conditions
laid down by regulation.

SECTION 228.- The Director -General of Elections shall fix the list of polling
stations as well as the distribution of electors within the said stations.

SECTION 229.- The table of the list of polling stations and of the distribution of
senatorial electors shall be posted at the divisional branches of Elections
Cameroon at least 15 (fifteen) days before the voting.

CHAPTER VIII
CONVENING THE ELECTORAL COLLEGE
 AND NOMINATION OF CANDIDATES

SECTION 230.- In view of the election of Senators, the electoral college shall be
convened by the President of the Republic at least 45 (forty-five) days before the
date of the poll, in accordance with the provisions of Section 86 above.

[Page 66]
 66

SECTION 231.- The nomination of candidates for the election of senators shall
be conducted  pursuant to Sections 164 and 167 of this law.

CHAPTER IX
ELECTORAL CAMPAIGN

SECTION 232.- The provisions of Sections 8 7 and 95  of this law shall apply to
the campaign for the election of Senators.

CHAPTER X
ELECTION OPERATIONS

SECTION 233.- Subject to the provisions of this Chapter, election operations
shall be conducted in accordance with Sections 95 and 115 of this law.

SECTION 234.- (1) Polling results for the election of Senators in each polling
station shall be minuted in a report.

                        (2) The report, drafted in two copies, shall be signed by the
President and all members of the polling station present.

                       (3) The two copies shall be forwarded to the regional branch of
Elections Cameroon. Invalid ballots, envelopes containing contested ballot
papers, tally sheets signed by each of the supervisor s as well as any other
relevant documents on the conduct of the election shall be appended to the said
report.

                (4) A copy of the report shall be filed at the regional branch of Elections
Cameroon. The other copy shall be forwarded to the regional supervisory
commission, at the behest of the said regional branch of Elections Cameroon.

CHAPTER XI
COUNTING OF VOTES

SECTION 235.- (1) A regional supervisory commission shall be set up in each
Region as follows:

Chairperson:  a magistrate of t he Court of Appeal , designated by the President
of the Court of appeal of the jurisdiction;

Members :

[Page 67]
 67
- 3 (three) repr esentatives of the Administration , designated
by the Governor;
- 1 (one) representative of each political party taking part in the election ;
- 3 (three) representatives of Elections Cameroon , designated by the
Director-General of Elections.
(2) The composition of the regional supervisory committee shall be
established by the Director-General of Elections.

SECTION 236. (1) The list of members  of the regional supervisory commission
shall be kept permanently at the regional branch of Elections Cameroon.

                             (2) It may be consulted by any elector of the constituency.

SECTION 237. (1) The regional supervisory commission shall centralize, ensure
the counting and verification of vote -counting operations, on the basis of reports
forwarded by polling stations.

                           (2) The regional supervisory commission shall not undertake to
cancel the reports referred to in sub-section (1) above.

(3) However, in case of a computing error or wrong data, it may review the
said reports. In this case, it shall be bound to reason its decision and state such
reasons in its report.

                         (4) The region al supervisory commission  shall mention in its
report all cases of inconsistency or doubt on the fairness of election operations. It
shall forward such report, together with its observations, to the national final vote
counting commission.

SECTION 238.- The counting of votes at national level shall be conducted in
accordance with the provisions of Sections 6 8 and 69 of this law , subject to the
replacement of divisional supervisory branches  by the regional supervisory
branches.

CHAPTER XII
ELECTORAL DISPUTES AND
PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS

SECTION 239.-(1) The Constitutional Council shall ensure the regularity of the
election of senators.

                        (2) Senatorial elections disputes shall be settled in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 133 and 136 of this law.

[Page 68]
 68
SECTION 240.- (1) The constitutional council shall proclaim the results of the
election of senators within 15 (fifteen) days following the close of the poll.

                        (2) The report on the conduct of elections and  proclamation of
results shall be prepared by the Constitutional Council in four copies. It shall file
the original and send the 3 (three) other copies to the Senate, the Ministry in
charge of local and regional authorities and the Electoral Board, respectively.

                      (3) The results of the election shall be publish according to  the
procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official Gazette in English and French.

CHAPTER XIII
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 241.- The deposit paid by candidate for the election of Senators shall
be refunded under the conditions fixed in Section 147 of this law.

SECTION 242.- Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 22 2 (1) above, where
the Senate is put in place before Regions, the elector al college for senatorial
elections shall exclusively comprise municipal councillors.

PART IX
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE ELECTION OF REGIONAL
COUNCILLORS

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

SECTION 243.- (1) Regional councillors shall be:

- Delegates of divisions elected by indirect universal suffrage ;
- Representatives of traditional rulers elected by their peers.

                         (2) The term of office of regional councillors shall be 5 (five)
years. They shall be eligible for re-election.

SECTION 244.- Elected r egional councillors shall meet as of right in ordinary
session of the Regional Council on the second Tuesday following the
proclamation of election results by the regional supervisory commissions.

[Page 69]
 69
SECTION 245.- (1) All the seats in the regional councils shall be renewed
every 5 (five) years. Elections shall be held not later than 20 (twenty) days to the
expiry of the term of office of regional councillors.

                          (2) In all the regions, electoral colleges shall be c onvened the
same day, according to the conditions and deadlines fixed under Section 2 30 of
this law.

SECTION 246.- (1) The regional council shall reflect:
-  the various sociological components of the region;
-  gender aspects.

                       (2) The number, proportion per category and allowances of
regional councillors shall be fixed by a separate law.

SECTION 247.-(1) Each division shall constitute a constituency for the election of
regional councillors.

                             (2) However, certain electoral constituencies could be warded
on the grounds of their peculiar situation by a decree of the President of the
Republic.

CHAPTER II
POLLING

SECTION 248.- (1) Delegates of divisions shall be elected by an electoral
college comprising municipal councillors.

                          (2) Representatives of traditional rulers shall be elected by an
electoral college composed of 1st, 2 nd and 3 rd degree native traditional rulers
whose designation has been approved in accordance with the regulation in force.

                         (3) Traditional rulers holding the office of municipal councillor
shall cast their vote in only one electoral college.

SECTION 249.- Conditions for the composition of the electoral colleges provided
for in Section 248 (1) and (2) above shall be fixed by regulation.

SECTION 250.- (1) Delegates of divisions shall be elected through a mixed
single round ballot, comprising a majority system and a proportional
representation system.

                         (2) The vote for representatives of traditional rulers shall be of a
single candidate majority system.

[Page 70]
 70
                        (3) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2)
above, the vote shall be for a single candidate where there is only one seat  for
the division or, as the case may be, in a constituency, as a result of the warding
provided for under Section 247(2) above.

CHAPTER III
QUALIFICATION OF CANDIDATES
AND INCOMPATIBILITIES

SECTION 251.- (1) No person may stand for election into a regi onal council
unless effectively resident in the region concerned.

                         (2) However, non -residents of a region may stand for election
into a regional council if they are domiciled within the territory of the region
concerned.

SECTION 252.- The qualification of candidates provided for under Section s 175
to 180 above shall be applicable to the election of regional councillors.

SECTION 253.-(1) Heads of administrative units and /or their assistants may not
stand for election into regional councils during their tenure of office.

                       (2) The incompatibility cited in sub -section (1) above shall be
equally be applicable, under the same conditions and during their tenure to:

- police, gendarmerie and prison administration officials;
- regional administration officials and employees;
- servicemen and servicewomen;
- judicial and legal officers;
- civil servants and public employees having to take cognizance of the
finances or accounts of the region concerned.

                     (3) The incompatibility provided for in sub -sections (1) and (2)
above shall remain in force for a period of one year following the end of their
tenure of office.

SECTION 254.-(1) Any regional councillor found to be in any of the positions of
incompatibility stipulated under Section 253 (1) and (2) above, shall be bound,
within no more than 1 (one) month to opt for his elective office or for his current
office

                       (2) The councillor concerned shall, through any written means,
inform the State representative in his region of his choice. The latter shall inform
the President of the regional council thereof.

[Page 71]
 71

                     (3) Where a regional councillor fails to make a choice, as provided
for under sub -sections  (1) and (2) above, he s hall be automatically declared to
have resigned from his office, by order of the Minister in charge of regional and
local authorities.

SECTION 255.- (1) Any regional councillor who, for reasons previous to his
election, finds himself in a situation of ineligibility and/or incompatibility provided
for under this law shall be declared to have resigned automatically by an order of
the minister in charge of local and regional authorities.

                          (2) The provisions of sub -section (1) above s hall equally be
applicable to any regional councillor deemed ineligible.

                        (3) The order provided for in sub -section (1) above may be
challenged before the competent administrative court.

                       (4) Where a regional councillor is declared to have resigned
automatically following a final penal sentence leading to the loss of his civic and
voting rights, the petition referred to in sub -section (3) shall not have a
suspensory effect.

SECTION 256.- No person may stand f or election on more than one list or be
member of more than one regional council.

SECTION 257 .- The provisions of Sections 181 and 190 above shall be
applicable to the nomination of candidates in view of the election of regional
councillors, subject to th e replacement of the council branch by the divisional
branch of Elections Cameroon.

CHAPTER IV
PREPARING THE POLLS

SECTION 258.- (1) The divisional branch of Elections Cameroon shall draw up
an electoral list comprising members of the 2 (two) electoral colleges provided for
under Section 248 above.

                           (2) The list of members of the electoral colleges shall be
updated, approved and published within 15 (fifteen) days following the convening
of the electoral colleges.

                          (3) Members of the electoral college composed of
representatives of traditional rulers must be domiciled within the territory of the
subdivision concerned.

[Page 72]
 72

                        (4) Registration cards shall be distributed within the time li mit
provided for under Section 226 above.

SECTION 259.- (1) Any decision to accept or reject a candidature or list of
candidates may be challenged by the candidate concerned , any representative
of a list concerned and/or any other list, and any other member of the electoral
college.

                         (2) The petition shall be lodged with the competent administrative
court, within no more than 5 (five) days of the notification of the rejection or
acceptance decision.

                       (3) The court referred to under sub -section (2) above shall give a
ruling within 7 (seven) days of lodgement of the petition. Its decision shall be
communicated forthwith to the Electoral Board, for enforcement.

SECTION 260.-  (1) During the election campaign, all complaints in respect of
the colour, acronym or symbol chosen by a candidate or list of candidates shall
be lodged with the competent administrative court no more than 3 (three) days of
the date of publication of candidatures or of the cognizance of th e allegations.
The competent administrative court  shall give a ruling within 4 (four) days of
lodgement of the petition.

                           (2) Complaints in respect of acts of injuring the character of
candidates or other offences shall be lodged  with ordinary law courts that shall
be seized by simple application. The ordinary law court shall give a ruling within
4 (four) days of lodgement of the complaint and may disqualify one or more
candidates.

CHAPTER V
POLLING

SECTION 261.- (1) Voting sha ll be conducted in the headquarters of each
division.
                        (2) Polling stations shall be determined by a decision of the
Director-General of Elections.

SECTION 262.- Polling shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
Sections  96 to 115 of this law. The reports of the local polling stations shall be
forwarded to regional supervisory commission for centralization and verification.

CHAPTER VI
COUNTING OF VOTES AND
PROCLAMATION OF RESULTS

[Page 73]
 73

SECTION 263.- (1) A regional supervisory commission is hereby set up in each
region comprising the following:

Chairperson: a magistrate of the Court of appeal designated by the President of
the Court of Appeal of the jurisdiction.

Members :

- 3 (three) representatives of the administrati on designated by the
Governor;
- 1 (one) representative of each political party participating in election;
- 3 (three) r epresentatives of Elections Cameroon designated by the
Director-General of Elections.

                             (2) The composition of t he regional supervisory commission
shall be established by the Director-General of Elections.

SECTION 264.- (1) The regional supervisory commission shall centralize, ensure
the counting and verification of vote -counting operations, on the basis of reports
forwarded by local polling commissions.

                          (2) It shall, where necessary, correct, review or cancel the said
reports.

SECTION 265.- (1) The regional supervisory commission shall proclaim the
results of the election of regional co uncillors at the level of the constituency
concerned, within 72 (seventy-two) hours following the close of the poll.

                          (2) The proceedings of the regional supervisory commission
shall be minuted in a report signed by all the members present.

                          (3) A copy of the report shall be forwarded to the representative
of the State for onward transmission to the Minister in charge of local and
regional authorities. A copy of the report shall equally be forwarded to t he
General Directorate of Elections.

SECTION 266.- After the elections :

- In the case of a single -member ballot, the candidate with the majority of
votes shall be declared elected; in case of a tie, the eldest candidate
shall be declared elected ;
- In the case of a list of candidates:

[Page 74]
 74

          (a) for delegates of divisions:

- where a list obtains an absolute majority of votes cast, it shall fill all
the seats;
- where no list obtains an absolute majority of votes cast, the seats
shall be shared as follows:
* the leading list shall obtain a number of seats equal to half of the
seats to be filled rounded up, where applicable; in case of a tie
between 2 (two) or several lists, this number of seats rounded down
shall be awarded to the list whose candidates have  the highest
average age;
* the remaining seats shared among all the lists, by applying the
winner-takes more rule; in case of a tie vote, the list having the
highest average age shall be preferred.

 (b) for representatives of traditional rulers:

- the list which obtains the majority of votes cast shall fill all the seats;
- the list that obtains less than 5 (five) per cent of votes cast in the
constituency shall not be considered in the proportional allocation of
seats;
- Seats shall be allocated to candidates according to the order in which
they appear on each list.

CHAPTER VII
ELECTION DISPUTES

SECTION 267.- (1) Any elector, candidate or the state representative in the
region may request the total or partial cancellation of the election operation in the
region concerned by simple application to the court with jurisdiction.

                         (2) The application must be lodged within 5 (five) days of the date
when the results were announced.

                         (3) The court seized of the applica tion shall make a ruling within
40 (forty) days. Its decision can be challenged.

SECTION 268- (1) Regional councillors whose election is challenged shall
remain in office pending a final decision.

      (2) Where cancellation of all or part of the electi on is final, electors
shall be convened within no more than 60 (sixty) days of such cancellation.

[Page 75]
 75
   (3) Only the lists of candidates that took part in the general
elections shall be allowed to participate in the by-elections.

CHAPTER VIII
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

SECTION 269.- (1) Members of electoral colleges provided for under Section
248 above shall be required to take part in the poll.

                        (2) The state shall defray the expenses related to the participation
of members of elect oral colleges in the poll, in compliance with conditions laid
down by regulation.

SECTION 270.- (1) The deposit shall be refunded to the candidate:

- who is declared ineligible before the printing of ballot papers;
- whose candidature is finally disqualified ;
- whose list obtained less than 5% of votes cast in the region
concerned. In this case, the copy of the results proclamation report
delivered by the competent regional supervisory commission shall
entail order to pay.

(2) The deposit referred to in sub -section (1) above may subsequently be
collected by the representative of the candidate or list of candidates.

                            (3) In all cases other than those mentioned in sub -section (1)
above, the deposit shall be retained by the public treasury.

PART X
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO VOTING BY CAMEROONIAN CITIZENS
SETTLED OR RESIDING ABROAD

SECTION 271.- Cameroonian citizens settled or residing abroad shall exercise
their right to vote through their participation in the election of the Presiden t of the
Republic and in referendums.

SECTION 272.- (1) Cameroonian citizens settled or residing abroad shall be
entered on the registers of electors opened at diplomatic representations and
consular posts in their countries of residence or attachment.

[Page 76]
 76
        (2) They must enjoy their civic and political rights and fulfil all
the required legal conditions to be an elector.

                       (3) On the proposal of Government, polling stations shall be set up
in diplomatic representations and consular posts.

SECTION 273.-(1) In view of the participation of Cameroonian citizens settled or
residing abroad in the election of the President of the Republic or in
referendums, the following structures shall be set up in diplomatic
representations and consular posts:

- commissions charged with the drawing up and revision of registers of
electors;
- commissions charged with the issuance and distribution of voters’
cards;
- local polling commissions.

   (2) The Electoral Board of Elections Cameroon (ELECAM)  shall hold
consultations with diplomatic representations, consular posts and political parties
with a view to setting up the commissions provided for in sub-section (1) above.

  (3) The composition of the commissions referred to in sub -section (1)
above shall be established by the Director-General of Elections.

 (4) The composition and functioning of the commissions referred to in sub -
section (1) above shall be determined by regulation.

SECTION 274.- Specific rules applicable to preparatory  activities for the election
of the President of the Republic and referendums, the organization and
supervision of elections and referendums, polling and the counting of the votes of
Cameroonian citizens settled or residing abroad shall be laid down by regulation.

PART XI
PROVISIONS SPECIFIC TO THE PUBLIC FUNDING OF POLITICAL
PARTIES AND ELECTION AND REFERENDUM CAMPAIGNS

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS

SECTION 275.- (1) Political parties and groups shall help the electorate in the
making of voting decisions.

[Page 77]
 77
  (2) As such, they may receive public funding in the context of
their missions, according to conditions fixed under this law.

SECTION 276.- (1) Public financing shall concern both the routine activities of
political parties and those devoted to the organization of election and referendum
campaigns.

(2) Funds derived from public funding shall be public funds.

                 (3) The public funding of political parties or candidates shall not be a
source of personal enrichment.

SECTION 277.-(1) A control commission is hereby instituted to verify , on the
basis of supporting documents, that the use of funds by political parties or
candidates conforms to the purpose of this law.

                             (2) Political parties or candidates receiving public funding shall
be bound to keep an account thereof.

                              (3) The organization, composition, powers and functioning of
the commission referred to in sub -section (1) above shall be fixed by the
President of the Republic.

SECTION 278-  (1) It shall be forbidden for any political party to receive
subsidies or funding from abroad foreign persons, organizations, powers or
States.

                   (2) Conditions for the private funding of political parties and
election and referendum campaigns shall be fixed by a special instrument.

CHAPTER II
PUBLIC FUNDING OF POLITICAL PARTIES

SECTION 279.- Each year, the finance law shall include a subsidy to cover
certain operating costs of legally recognized political parties, i n accordance with
Section 281 below.

SECTION 280.- The subsidy referred to in Section 27 9 above shall be provided
by the State to a political party to cover inter alia:

- recurrent administrative expenses;
- the dissemination of its political programme ;

[Page 78]
 78
- the co-ordination of the political activities of its
members ;
- preparation for elections and referendums.

SECTION 281.- The subsidy shall be divided in 2 (two) equal parts:

- the first, to be allocated to political parties represented in the National
Assembly, the Senate, the regional council and/or the municipal council;
- the second, to be allocated to political parties in accordance with the results
of the last election of Members of Parliament, Senators and/or regional and
municipal councillors.

SECTION 282.- (1) The part allocated to the funding of political parties
represented in the National Assembly , the Senate, the regional council and/or
the municipal council shall be paid in proportion to the ir respective number of
seats.

                             (2) The Bureau x of the National Assembly , the Senate, the
regional council and/or the municipal council shall furnish a list of Members of
Parliament, Senators, regional councillors and municipal councillors representing
each political party.

SECTION 283.- (1) The part allocated to the functioning of political parties in
accordance with the results obtained at the last election of Members of
Parliament, Senators, regional councillors and municipal councillors shall be paid
to parties which obtained at  least 5% of the votes cast in at least one
constituency at the said elections.

                (2) The distribution shall be in proportion of results obtained.

CHAPTER III
PUBLIC FUNDING OF ELECTION AND
 REFERENDUM CAMPAIGNS

SECTION 284.- (1) The S tate shall contribute to the funding of election
campaigns by defraying some expenses of political parties or candidates.

                         (2) The State’s contribution in respect of the expenses referred to
in sub-section (1) above shall be included i n the finance law of each election or
referendum year.

SECTION 285.- Public funds earmarked for the funding of election campaigns for
the election of Members of Parliament, Senators, regional or municipal

[Page 79]
 79
councillors, shall be shared in 2 (two) equal part s among the political parties
taking part in the elections as follows :

- the first part shall be paid after publication of the lists of candidates
to all parties depending on the  lists submitted and endorsed in the
various constituencies ;
- the second par t shall be paid after the proclamation of results to
parties proportionately to the number of seats obtained.

SECTION 286.- (1) Funds earmarked for the funding of election campaign f or
presidential election, shall be divided in 2 (two) equal parts to cand idates as
follows :

- a first part, after publication of the list of candidates, allotted equally to
the various candidates ;
- a second, served after proclamation of results to candidates with more
than 5% of votes cast, proportionately to the results obtained.

                              (2) Any candidate who withdraws before the polls or who does
not participate effectively in the election campaign shall be required to refund the
totality of the amount received in respect of the first part referred to in  sub-
section (1) above.

SECTION 287.- (1) Public funds earmarked for the funding of the referendum
campaign shall be shared in 2 (two) equal parts as follows :

- the first part, after the publication of the list of political parties
authorized to take part  in the referendum campaign, paid to the
various political parties proportionately to the ir results at the last
election of Members of Parliament and/or Senators.
- the second part, after the proclamation of results, paid proportionately
to the results of ea ch party concerned in the last election of Members
of Parliament and/or Senators.

                            (2) Any political party that  withdraws before the polls or that
does not participate effectively in the election campaign shall be required to
refund the totality of the amount received in respect of the first part referred to in
sub-section (1) above.

PART XII

[Page 80]
 80
PENAL, MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER I
PENAL PROVISIONS

SECTION 288 .- (1) Section 122 -1 of the Penal Code shall apply against any
person who:

- registers on electoral registers using a false identity or who, during his
registration, conceals any of the ineligibilities provided for under this law;
- through false statements or certificates, registers himself unduly on an
electoral register or who, through the same means, unduly registers or
cancels the name of a citizen ;
- upon losing his right to vote, participates in the poll ;
- votes, either by virtue of a false registration or by using the name and
capacity of other registered voters;
- votes several times, following multiple registrations ;
- charged during an election with receiving and counting the vote of
citizens, subtracts, adds or modifies the ballot papers or includes a
name that is not registered ;
- through false information, slanderous statements or any other fraudulent
acts, cancels or diverts votes or causes one or several voters to abstain
from the vote ;
- before or after the poll, failing to comply with legislative or regulatory
provisions or through any other fraudul ent act, violates secrecy of the
pool, prejudices its fairness, breaches the conduct of the poll and
modifies the results thereof ;
- is found guilty of fraudulent acts in the issuance or production of
certificates of registration or striking off from electoral registers ;
- uses personal data contained in the electoral register for purposes other
than elections ;
- on polling day, with or without violence, is found to be the author or an
accomplice of the stealing of a ballot box or any other election material.

                     (2) Where the author of the offence or his accomplice is a public
servant, in the sense of Section 131 of the Penal Code, he shall be liable to the
penalties provided for under Section 141 of the Penal Code.

SECTION 289.- Section 123-1 of the Penal Code shall apply to any person who:

[Page 81]
 81
- through menacing gatherings, clamours or
demonstrations, disrupts election operation s or infringes the exercise of
the right or freedom to vote;
- on polling day, is found guilty of insult or violence agai nst the local
polling commission or any of its members, or through assaults or
threats, delays or obstructs election operations ;
- through gifts, generosity, favours, promise of public or private
employment or any other specific benefits offered with the pu rpose of
influencing the vote of one or several electors, obtains their vote, either
directly or through a third party ;
- directly or through a third party, accepts or requests from candidates the
above-mentioned gifts, generosity, favours or benefits;
- through assault, violence or threats against an elector, either by making
him fear to lose his job or expose himself, his family or fortune to a
danger, influences his vote ;

SECTION 290 .- (1) Any person who enters a polling station with a visible
weapon shall be punished with a fine of 25  000 ( twenty-five thousand) CFA
francs and imprisonment of from 10 (ten) days to 2 (two) months or only one of
the two penalties.

                       (2) The imprisonment term may be extended to 4 (four) months,
and the fine to 500 000 (five hundred thousand) if the weapon is hidden.

SECTION 291.- (1) Any activity or manifestation of a political character shall be
prohibited within public establishments, as well as in school and university
establishments.

                        (2) Any infringement of the provisions of sub -section (1) above
shall be punished with a fine of from 25  000 (twenty-five thousand) to 250  000
(two hundred and fifty thousand) CFA francs, and imprisonment of from 10 (ten)
days to 4 (four) months, or only one of the two penalties.

SECTION 292.- Any person who, acting on his personal behalf or on behalf of a
political party, uses funds received in the context of public funding for purposes
other than those provided for under this law shall be liable  to the punishment
provided for under Section 184 of the Penal Code.

SECTION 293.- Save in case of flagrante delicto, no penal proceedings shall be
instituted against a candidate for infringement of any of the provisions of this law
before the proclamation of the election results.

CHAPTER II
MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL PROVISIONS

[Page 82]
 82

SECTION 294.- (1) The cost of paper , printing of ballot papers, envelopes and
various election documents, as well as the cost of transportation or production of
election materials or documents shall be defrayed under the elections budget.

                              (2) The functioning of electoral commissions shall be charged
to the budget of Elections Cameroon and/or the elections budget.

SECTION 295.-  (1) All judicial deeds  concerning elections shall be exempted
from stamp and registration duties.

          (2) Copies of birth certificate required for determining the age of
electors and candidates shall be issued free of charge on an unstamped paper
upon request. They shall mention, at the top of the page, the purpose for which
they are issued and shall not be used for any other purpose.

SECTION 296.- (1)  Concerning the supervision of the election and referendum
process, Elections Cameroon may collaborate with accredited n ational and
international observers.

                 (2) National observers shall be accredited by the Minister in
charge of territorial administration.

                        (3) International observers shall be accredited by the Minister in
charge of territorial administration, after the opinion of the Minister in charge of
external relations.

                      (4) The Minister in charge of territorial administration, in
consultation with Elections Cameroon, shall establish the code of conduct of
election observers.

SECTION 297.-   (1) The provisions of this law shall repeal and replace those of:

- Law No.  91/20 of 16 December  1991 to lay down conditions
governing the election of Members of Parliament, as amended and
supplemented by Law No. 97/13 of 19 march 1997 and Law No.
2006/9 of 29 December 2006 ;
- Law No.  92/2 of 14 August 1992 to lay down conditions for the
election of municipal councillors, as amended by Law No. 95/24 of 11
December 1995 and Law No. 2006/10 of 26 December 2006 ;
- Law No.  92/10 of 17 September 1992 to lay down conditions
governing the vacancy of and election to the Presidency of the
Republic, as amended and supplemented by Law No.  97/20 of 9
September 1997 and Law No. 2011/002 of 6 May 2011 ;

[Page 83]
 83
- Law No. 97/ 6 of 10 January 1997 to determine
the period for the revision and recompilation of registers of electors;
- Law No.  2000/15 of 19 December 2000  relating to the funding of
political parties and election campaigns;
- Law No.  2006/4 of 14  July  2006 to lay the down conditions
governing the election of regional councillors;
- Law No. 2006/5 of 14 July 2006 to lay down conditions governing the
election of Senators;
- Law No. 2010/3 of 13 April 2010 to lay down the referendum
procedure ;
- Law No. 2006/11 of 29 December 2006 to set up and lay down the
organization and functioning of Elections Cameroon  (ELECAM), as
amended and supplemented by Law No. 2008/5 of 29 June 2008,
Law No. 2010/5 of 13 April 2010 and Law No. 2011/1 of 6 May 2011 ;
- Law No. 2011/13 of 13 July 2011 relating to voting by C ameroonian
citizens settled or residing abroad.

SECTION 298.- The implementation arrangements of this law shall be specified,
as necessary, by regulatory instruments.

SECTION 299 .- This law shall be registered, published according to the
procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official Gazette in English and French.