[Page 1]
REPUBLIC OF CAMEROON                                   PEACE – WORK – FATHERLAND
                   ----------------                                                                  ---------------
LAW No. 2009/019 OF 15 DECEMBER 2009
 ON LOCAL FISCAL SYSTEM
1

[Page 2]
The National Assembly deliberated
and  adopted,  the  President  of  the
Republic hereby enacts the law set
out below:
PART I
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SINGLE CHAPTER
SECTION I.: (1) This law on local fiscal system lays down the taxes, levies and
royalties  collected  for  decentralized  structures,  hereinafter  referred  to  as
"regional and local authorities".
(2)  Any  revenue  collected  by  State  or  competent  taxation
services of regional and local authorities for the latter shall be considered as
local taxes. All revenue collected shall still be referred to as "local taxes".
(3)  The  local  fiscal  System  shall  apply  to  councils,  city
councils, sub-divisional councils regions and to any other type of regional and
local authority mat may be set up by law.
(4) Unless otherwise provided for under specific provisions of
this  law,  the  fiscal  procedure  applicable  to  State  levies  and  taxes  shall  be
transferred with the necessary changes having been made for the tax base, issue,
recovery, prosecution, control and litigation on taxes, levies and royalties due to
councils and regions.
SECTION 2: Local taxes shall include:
2

[Page 3]
- council taxes;
- additional council tax on State taxes and levies;
- council levies;
- Regional taxes and levies;
any other levy provided for by law.
SECTION 3: (1) A regional or local authority may collect a tax, levy or royalty
only  if  such  a  tax,  levy  or  royalty  has  been  created  by  law,  voted  by  the
legislative body and approved by the competent supervisory authority.
                           (2) The rates for the collection of the taxes and levies of
regional  and  local  authorities  shall  be  fixed  by  the  legislative  body.  in
compliance with the bracket provided for by law.
SECTION  4:  Regional  and  local  authorities  shall  be  responsible  for  the
management of the taxes and levies devolved to them, subject to those managed
by taxation services.
SECTION  5:  For  the  harmonious  development  of  All  regional  and  local
authorities and in accordance with the principle of solidarity, proceeds from
certain local taxes and levies may be subjected to equalization following the
criteria and conditions set forth under laws and regulations.
SECTION 6: (1) The State shall ensure that annual proceeds from council taxes
correspond  to  a  proportional  rate  established  as  a  ratio  of  its  level  of  tax
resources.
(2) In this respect, the State financial services involved in the
fiscal management of regional and local authorities shall ensure, with the same
efficiency as for State taxes, the recovery of local taxes that fall within their
competence.
(3) Local taxes shall be issued and collected  under the same
conditions as those of the State, unless otherwise provided for under special
provisions of this law.
3

[Page 4]
(4) With regard to the collection of taxes and levies, regional and
local authorities shall enjoy the privilege of the treasury.
PART II
COUNCIL TAXES
SECTION 7: Proceeds from direct council taxes collected by the State shall be
derived from:
− business licences;
− liquor licences;
− discharge tax;
− property tax on landed assets;
− gambling and entertainment levy;
− immovable property conveyance fee;
− automobile stamp duty;
− forest royalty.
CHAPTER I
BUSINESS LICENCE
I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 8: Any natural person or corporate body of Cameroonian or foreign
nationality  operating  in  a  council  any  economic,  commercial  or  industrial
activity or carrying out any other profession not included among the exemptions
set forth in this law, shall be liable to the business licence.
 SECTION 9: The effective or habitual exercise of a profession for financial
gain shall entail payment of the business licence.
SECTION 10: (1) The business licence shall be assessed on the annual turnover
declared by the taxpayer under the various categories as listed in Annex I.
 (2) The activities listed in Annex II shall, as a matter of right,
be liable to the business licence irrespective of their turnover. Such activities
shall be taxed following the tax brackets provided in Annex I.
4

[Page 5]
 (3) However, with regard to inter-city passenger and goods
carriers, the business licence shall be assessed on the basis of the number of
seats or the payload of the vehicle.
(4) For the sale of petroleum products by managers of petrol
stations who are not owners of the goods, the basis of assessment of the business
licence shall be the amount of the margin determined by marketers.

II.
WAIVERS AND EXEMPTIONS
II. I. EXEMPTIONS
SECTION 11: They following shall not be liable to the business licence:
1. the  State,  regional  and  local  authorities,  public  establishments  and
government  agencies,  for cultural,  educational,  health, social, sport or
tourist  activities  carried  out  by  them  regardless  of  their  turnover  tax
situation;
2. hawkers, be they in the streets, public places or in flower or grocery
markets;
3. street vendors of newspapers and periodicals, excluding any other articles
of  stationery,  and  provided  their  activity  has  been  duly  declared  in
accordance with the law in force;
4. business associates in a partnership, in joint-stock, Limited liability or
incorporated companies;
5. songwriters;
6. savings and insurance funds managed free of charge as well as mutual
assistance schemes, provided they are duly authorized and function in
accordance with their set objectives;
7. canteen managers, provided they do not sell alcoholic drinks to the public;
8. hospitals run by religious bodies or not-for-profit organizations;
5

[Page 6]
9. growers, farmers, stock breeders for the sale and handling of harvest and
fruits from the fields belonging to them or which they exploit, or for the
sale of the animals they rear, care for or fatten;
10.company stores,  farmers' unions  and  consumer  cooperatives,  provided
they possess no shops and confine themselves to grouping the orders of
their members and distributing in their stores the commodities, produce or
merchandise ordered;
11.private establishments for the reception and vocational training of poor
children;
12.schools;
13. explorers and hunters ;
14.fishermen  and  registered  seamen  personally  involved  in  fishing  and
selling their own catch;
15.persons liable to the discharge tax;
16.canoe operators with the exception of those using a motor or steam vessel;
17.farmers  selling  firewood  coming  solely  from  clearing  their  farms  for
cultivation;
18.owners or leaseholders of salt marshes;
19.landlords or tenants accidentally renting furnished parts of their personal
houses, where such rental is not periodic in nature;
20.wage and salary earners in respect of their paid employment only;
21.rural development cooperative societies, agricultural mutual benefit and
credit schemes operating in accordance with their set objectives;
22.cooperative societies and/or their unions as well as common initiative
groups (CIGs) aimed at:
a) either  carrying  out  or  facilitating  all  operations  for  the
production, conservation or sale of farm produce harvested
exclusively from farms owned by members;
b) or providing their members with farm equipment machines
and instruments for their own use;
6

[Page 7]
23.commercial  and  industrial  travellers  and  representatives  who  may  be
working for one or more houses, whether paid by commission or fixed
salary  provided  they  have  no  trading  character  independent  of  their
principals.
II. II.
TEMPORARY EXEMPTION  :
SECTION 12.- (1) New enterprises shall be exempted from the business licence
for a period of 2 (two) years.
(2)  At  their  request,  a  business  licence  instrument  labelled
"EXEMPTED" shall be issued to new enterprises that benefit from exemption.
III.
RATES
SECTION  13:  (1)  The  tax  to  be  paid  shall  be  calculated  by  applying  a
digressive rate to the turnover of the taxpayer for the last but one year.
(2) This rate shall be fixed by the regional or local authorities
which are beneficiaries of the proceeds of the business licence, within a duly
determined range per turnover bracket.
(3)  New  enterprises  shall  be  required  to  present  a  projected
turnover to be regularized at the end of the period.
(4) Any taxpayer who makes a turnover above 2,000,000,000
francs shall be granted a 5% reduction per full bracket of 500,000,000 francs,
provided  that  such  reduction  may  not  exceed  30%  of  the  turnover  above
2,000,000,000 francs.
(5) However, in case of inter-city passenger and goods carriers,
the business licence shall be assessed as follows:
a) For passenger carriers and per vehicle:
7

[Page 8]
     - a fixed tax equal to 27,500 CFA francs;
     - a variable tax equal to 1,250 CFA francs per seat as from the
eleventh seat.
b) For goods carriers and per vehicle:
     - a fixed tax equal to 37,500 CFA francs;
                         - a variable tax equal to 2,500 CFA francs per seat as from the
eleventh seat.
SECTION  14:  (1)  One  business  licence  shall  be  required  for  each
establishment. The  following  shall  be  considered  as  distinct  establishments:
buildings  or  definitely  separate  parts  of  buildings. Any  person  who  sells
merchandise or products through a vendor or causes workmen to work on his
behalf on the pavement, or under an awning or unclosed veranda of his business
establishment  shall  also  be  liable  to  business  licence  for  a  separate
establishment.
(2)  Any  person  who  accommodates  as  specified  above  a
workman or vendor who cannot establish that he is personally in possession of a
business licence shall be deemed to cause such person to sell or work on his
behalf.
(3) Any  building  site  or group of building  sites  opened  in a
Council and placed under the technical supervision of an employee shall also be
liable to the business licence as an establishment.
(4) Any transactions effected by a business licence holder on
behalf  of  a  third  party,  either  on  consignment  or  under  the  control  of  his
principal, whether the principal requires reports, minutes, special accounts or
bas such transactions supervised from time to time, shall also be liable to a
separate business licence in the name of the principals.
(5) A husband and wife, whether they have separate estates or
not shall be liable to one business licence only when carrying out the same
activity in the same establishment.
8

[Page 9]
(6)  A  manufacturer  selling  exclusively  wholesale  in  separate
premises, only products manufactured by him shall not be liable to the business
licence for sales made in the said premises.
(7) Where more than one set of premises is used, the exemption
shall apply solely to the premises nearest the factory.
(8) Concerning professional road carriers liable  to assessment
based on actual earnings, each operator's business licence shall be calculated on
the basis of his turnover.
IV.
SPECIAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 15: Business licences shall be established with due regard to the
following special conditions:
(1)  Where  there  is  no accounting  data  to  enable  the turnover  of any
commercial activity to be evaluated accurately, such activity shall be deemed to
be equal to ten times the recorded stock evaluated at its selling price. However,
the inspector or controller shall be entitled to assess the business licence by
comparing with a similar establishment.
(2) In no case shall the imports or exports effected by a bank, branch of a
bank or any organization acting as a commission merchant or forwarding agent,
exempt customers from payment of the import or export business licence.
(3) However, a trader whose transactions of this nature do not amount to
15,000,000 CFA francs a year shall not be considered as an importer.
(4) For the purpose of the importers' or exporters' business licence, import
and export turnover shall be aggregated.
(5) The  business  licence  of a carrier  shall not cover itinerant  trading
operations by the carrier, the driver and his mates, the ship owner, the master or
crew members.
9

[Page 10]
(6) Shipping companies and airlines whose vessels or aircraft make calls
at Cameroon ports or airports shall only be liable to the business licence where
they have an establishment there.
(7)  Insurance  companies  which  are  represented  in  Cameroon  without
having any establishment there shall be liable to the business licence only at the
registered office or principal establishment of the insurance agent representing
them.
V.
PERSONAL CHARACTER OF THE BUSINESS LICENCE
SECTION 16: The business licence shall be personal and may be used only by
the person to whom it is issued.
SECTION 17: Joint stock companies and limited liability companies, whose
activity is liable to the business licence shall be taxed under the name of the
enterprise.
VI.
ANNUAL NATURE OF THE BUSINESS LICENCE
SECTION 18: The business licence shall be due for the full year by any person
engaged in a taxable activity as at 1 January.
SECTION 19: (1) Persons who start up an activity subject to the business
licence in the course of the year shall be liable to this tax only as from the first
day of the month in which they commenced this activity, unless where, by its
nature, the said activity cannot be undertaken throughout the year. In such a
case, the business licence shall be due for the whole year irrespective of when
the business is started.
(2)  The  turnover  to  be  taken  into  account  for  assessing  the
business licence shall be:
               for new activities, the turnover declared on the first day of the
start of the activity;
10

[Page 11]
- for  activities  at  least  one  year  old,  the  turnover  realised
during the previous financial year.
SECTION 20: In the event of cessation of activity as a result of death, court
ruling or petition in bankruptcy or owing to expropriation or expulsion, the
business licence shall be due only up to the end of the current month. Discharge
from the balance shall be granted on the application of the person liable within
three months following the event.
VII.
OBLIGATIONS OF PERSONS LIABLE
SECTION 21: (1) Persons undertaking an activity liable to the business licence,
even in case of exemption, shall be required to make a declaration thereof in
writing,  to the relevant  Taxation Centre  within 10 (ten)  days  following  the
opening of business.
                           (2) The said declaration shall provide the following
information:
- full name or business name;
- date of birth or incorporation;
- place of birth or registered office;
- full name(s) and address of the father or manager;
- full name(s) and address of the mother;
- nationality;
- number in trade register;
- enterprise registration number;
- site  references  (of  the  business  registered  office  and  respective
establishments by towns, neighbourhoods, streets, door number);
- post box number;
- telephone number and, where necessary, e-mail address;
- type of activity;
- amount of turnover;
- reference of the last land tax return or registration of the lease contract;
any  other  information  necessary   for  assessing  the  business  licence
certificate.
11

[Page 12]
           (3) A declaration filled on the same standard declaration form shall
be addressed to the Taxation Centre in case, either of the payment of the animal
or quarterly business licence or stoppage or cessation of activities.
          (4) Every business licence payer shall display his business licence
certificate in his establishment.

          (5) To be valid, the business licence certificate so displayed shall be
backed by receipts attesting to its payment.
SECTION 22: Any taxpayer who loses his business licence certificate may be
issued a duplicate by the territorially competent chief of taxation centre. The
duplicate, issued on a special form, shall bear references of the payment of the
said business licence.
VIII.
ISSUANCE AND PAYMENT OF THE BUSINESS LICENCE
SECTION 23: (1) Taxpayers subject to the business licence shall declare and
pay their taxes in a lump sum:
- within 2 (two) months following the beginning of the financial year,
in case of renewal of the business licence;
- within  2  (two)  months  following  the  expiry  of  the  temporary
exemption.
   (2)  However,  notwithstanding  the  above  provisions,  inter-city
passenger and goods carriers shall declare and pay their business licence within
15 (fifteen) working days following the end of each quarter.
SECTION  24:  (1)  The  business  licence  certificate  shall  be  issued  by  the
Taxation Centre in the name of the person carrying out the taxable activity.
                 (2) It shall be paid using assessment bulletins that differ with
councils and with beneficiary entities.
12

[Page 13]
SECTION 25: After the payment, the Chief of Taxation Centre shall issue to
the taxpayer a business licence certificate bearing his picture in case of a natural
person, with business licence payment receipts as annexes.
SECTION 26: (1) Enterprises falling within the competence of the structure in
charge of major companies at the Directorate General of Taxation shall pay the
business licence through transfer orders payable to the accountant of the council
and beneficiary bodies.
  (2) On their part, the payee accountants shall upon seeing the
tax certificate issued by the authorizing officer, issue a receipt of payment to the
enterprises.
  (3) The councils and beneficiary bodies shall at the same time
forward to the above-mentioned structure a statement of effective transfer of
paid business licence revenue with the reference of the transfer orders received
and receipts of payment issued.
  (4)  In  view  of  the  above-mentioned  payment  supporting
documents, the head of the structure shall issue business licence certificates
following the same procedure as above.
SECTION  27:  The  taxation  Service  may  correct  total  or  partial  omissions
detected in assessing the business licence, as well as errors made in determining
the tax base or in applying the rate up to the end of the financial year following
the year of assessment.
SECTION 28: In each Taxation Centre and by regional and local authority or
beneficiary body, in accordance with the provisions of the Fiscal Procedure
Book of the General Tax Code, shall be kept:
- a ledger-journal of assessments and collections;
- a record of daily reconciling of taxes and levies collected for the various
beneficiaries;
- a control register that helps to identify and get back to taxpayers who
might not have paid their due.
13

[Page 14]
IX.
PENALTIES
SECTION 29: Any taxpayer who fails to pay his business licence within the
prescribed time-limit or who fails to furnish the information required to assess
the business licence within the same time-limit shall be liable to a penalty of
from 10% to 30% of the taxes due per month of lateness.
SECTION 30: (1) Any taxpayer engaged in an activity liable to the business
licence, who fails to pay the relevant taxes, shall be automatically assessed for
the whole year and the tax payable shall be increased by an additional charge of
50% to 100% depending on whether his bona fide is established or not.
(2)  In  the  event  of  the  illegal  exercise  of  an  activity  or  the
exercise of a prohibited activity, a report shall be drawn up by any functionary
of the Taxation Service with the rank of at least a controller or by any sworn-in
law enforcement officer, and forwarded to the appropriate quarters.
(3)  For  an  illegal  or  prohibited  activity,  the  normal  business
licence tax shall be increased by 100% but shall not give rise to the issuance of a
business licence.
SECTION 31: (1) Failure to display the business licence shall be punishable
with  a  fine  of  10,000  CFA  francs  per  offence. This  fine  shall  be  payable
forthwith through a payment form.
(2) Failure to pay the outstanding sums of business licence within
the time-limit provided shall lead to the automatic and immediate sealing of the
establishment(s), without prejudice to the penalties provided for elsewhere.
SECTION 32: Failure to present the transport business licence to the authority
in charge of control shall lead to the impounding of the vehicle concerned.
ANNEXES TO CHAPTER I
14

[Page 15]
ANNEX I: TABLE OF CLASSES OF BUSINESS LICENCES AND
CORRESPONDING BRACKETS
ANNUAL TURNOVER (T.O.) SEGMENT CLASS RATE BRACKETS
Turnover of 2,000 million francs and above
1 0.075% to 0.0875%
Turnover of at least 1,000 million and below
2,000 million francs 2 0.0875% to 0.1%
Turnover of at least 500 million and below
1,000 million francs
3 0.100% to 0.108%
Turnover of at least 300 million and below
500 million francs
4 0.108% to 0.116%
Turnover of at least 100 million and below
300 million francs
5 0.133% to 0.150%
Turnover of at least 15 million and below 100
million francs 6 0.158% to 0.16%
Turnover of at least 5 million and below 15
million francs 7 0.283% to 0.400%
ANNEX II: TABLE OF ACTIVITIES AUTOMATICALLY SUBJECT TO
THE BUSINESS LICENCE
1 Non-producing buyer or collector of gold or precious stones;
2 Property manager;
3 Business agency;
4 Agent for a telecommunications company;
5 Agent for a bank or financial establishment;
6 Agent for an insurance or reinsurance company;
7 Airline agent;
8 Ocean-going or in-land water shipping company;
9 Agent for the distribution or marketing of water;
10 Agent for the distribution or marketing of energy;
11 Advertising agent;
15

[Page 16]
12 Security agency;
13 Travel company;
14 Real estate agent;
15 Periodic branch of a bank or financial establishment;
16 Debt collection agent;
17 Victualler or ship chandlery;
18 Architect, research consultancy or engineering consultant;
19
Tool  shop  for  grinding,  repairing,  rectifying,  assembling  and  industrial
maintenance;
20 Lawyer;
21 Bank or financial establishment;
22 Bar and dance hall;
23 Jeweller;
24 Butcher with refrigeration facilities and pork butcher;
25 Baker with mechanical facilities;
26 Brewer;
27 Dealer in second hand, old and rare objects;
28 Surgeon, physician or dentist;
29 Commodity merchant;
30 Cargo inspector;
31 Auditor;
32 Goods controller;
33 Auctioneer;
34 Customs clearing agent;
35 Insurance or reinsurance company;
36 Airline;
37 Ocean-going or in-land water transport company;
38 Warehouse dealership;
39 Tax consultant;
40 Broker;
41 Retailer of alcoholic drinks requiring a licence;
42 Retailer of soft drinks requiring a licence;
43 Decorator;
44 Builder's draughtsman;
45 Civil engineering or public works contractor;
46 Cleaning, pest control for insects, rats or septic tank emptying contractor,
16

[Page 17]
etc;
47 Undertaker's;
48 Newspaper, radio, television or bill posting advertising agent;
49 River or sea rescue or towing contractor;
50 River navigation company;
51 Road carrier;
52 Aerial works contractor;
53 Public accountant or Chartered accountant;
54 Court expert;
55 Technical expert;
56 Refrigerated warehouse operator;
57 Office automation workshop operator;
58
Operator  of  an  establishment  for  the  processing,  bottling  or  canning  of
beverages;
59 Telecommunications System operator;
60 Sawmill operator;
61 Car-washing or greasing station operator;
62 Energy transformation or generating plant operator;
63 Drinking water production station operator;
64 Alcoholic drinks dealer;
65 Night club promoter;
66 Owner of a casino or similar establishment;
67 Seller of soft drinks and wines;
68 Operator of games and public entertainment;
69 Owner of general warehouses, storehouses or docks;
70 Owner of cinema hall;
71 Taxi owner or business;
72 Pay phone operator;
73 Operator of sleeping cars or restaurant cars;
74 Operator of games of chance or parlour games;
75 Forestry operator;
76 Manufacturer of syrup, lemonade or aerated water;
77 Manufacturer of yoghurt, ice cream or lollypops;
78 Surveyor;
79 Insurance agent;
80 Tourist guide;
17

[Page 18]
81 Classified hotel;
82 Unclassified hotel;
83 Bailiff;
84 Importer or exporter;
85 Packaging industry;
86 Manufacturing or processing industry;
87 Registered intermediary for purchase of raw produce;
88 Massage therapist;
89 Laboratory for analysis, study tests;
90 Biological or medical laboratory;
91 Photographic development laboratory;
92 Aircraft hire undertaking;
93 Computer or punch card machine rental service;
94 Canopy, chair or plate rental;
95 Bicycle hire company;
96 Video cassette rentals;
97 Moped hire company;
98 Business pool, furnished premises, filing station hire company;
99 Labour contractor;
100
Letting of halls or fitted premises for meetings, ceremonies, feasts, shows,
etc.;
101 Vehicle- or machine-rental agent;
102 Furniture-rental company;
103 Manicurist, foot care specialist providing beauty care;
104 Automobile hawker;
105 Sand, gravel or rubble stone seller;
106 Mechanic-repairman, automotive electrician;
107 Physician or promoter of a health facility or clinic;
108 Notary public;
109 Organizer of shows and concerts;
110 Pastry maker, candy maker;
111 Landscape gardener;
112 Pharmacist;
113 Scout with office;
114 Repairer of audio-visual equipment selling spare parts;
115 Sales representative;
18

[Page 19]
116 Classified restaurant;
117 Unclassified restaurant;
118 Trustee in bankruptcy;
119 Dyer, cleaner or launderer using mechanical processes;
120 Hairdresser and seller of cosmetics or beautician;
121 Proprietor of a day care centre;
122 Forwarding agent or stevedore;
123 Mixed persons and goods commuting service;
124 Mass urban transport by bus;
125 Salt or sugar refinery;
126 Veterinarian.
CHAPTER II
LIQUOR LICENCES
I.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 33: Any natural person or corporate body authorized to engage in the
whole  or  retail  sale,  in  any  capacity  whatsoever,  or  in  the  production  of
alcoholic or non-alcoholic drinks, shall be liable to the liquor licence.
SECTION 34: (1) The following shall be considered non-alcoholic drinks:
- non-alcoholic beer brewed from the fermentation of a wort prepared
from malt, barley or rice, hops and water;
- cider, perry made from the fermentation of fresh apple and pear
juice and, more generally, any fermented juice from fresh fruit such
as:  lemon,  orange,  pineapples,  gourds,  raspberry,  pomegranate,
cherry, red currants, etc. with the exception of wine.
(2) Beer, wine, liqueurs and beverages other than those listed in
the preceding sub-section shall be deemed to be alcoholic beverages.
SECTION 35: The following activities shall be exempt from liquor licence: the
sale of mineral water, aerated water, flavoured or not with non-alcoholic extracts
19

[Page 20]
and the sale of fresh unfermented fruit juice where such sales are made in an
establishment distinct from one licensed to sell dutiable beverages.
SECTION 36 (1) Liquor licences shall payable by importers, producers and
dealers who sell drinks subject to a licence. It shall be personal and payable
annually.
(2) It shall be payable per establishment in accordance with the
same rules as those applicable to business licences or the discharge tax, as the
case may be.  The licence shall be assessed according to turnover.
SECTION 37: (1) The rate for liquor licence shall be as follows:
Twice the amount of the business licence for non alcoholic beverages;
Four times the amount of the business licence for alcoholic beverages;
(2) However, for dealers selling drinks subject to a licence and
liable to the discharge tax, the licence shall be fixed as follows:
One time the amount of the discharge tax for non-alcoholic beverages;
Two times the amount of the discharge tax for alcoholic beverages.
SECTION 38: Where the sale of drinks is carried on concurrently with some
other business in the same establishment,  the turnover to be considered for
assessing the licences shall be the one declared for the sale of drinks.
SECTION 39: (1) Off-licence dealers may not sell quantities of less than one
litre except in the case of sealed bottle bearing a mark of origin. Otherwise, they
shall be treated as on-licence dealer.
(2) Any person who allows tolerates in his establishment or on its
veranda, the consumption of any drinks sold on a takeaway basis shall likewise
be deemed to be an on-licence dealer.
SECTION 40: Where in the same establishment, the operations effected might
give rise to different licences, such establishment shall be liable to the higher
licence for all the operations carried out by it.
20

[Page 21]
SECTION 41: Any delivery of drinks subject to a licence connection with
commercial, barter or exchange transactions, and even gifts, or any drinks set
aside for private consumption shall be deemed to be a sale for the assessment of
turnover for liquor licence.
SECTION 42: (1) The payment of liquor licence shall be distinct from the
payment of business licence or discharge tax and liability to one licence shall
not constitute exemption from the other.
(2) The selling of drinks carried on concurrently with some other
business shall entail the payment of liquor licence and of business licence for the
other business.
SECTION 43: (1) All provisions pertaining to payment of business licence or
the discharge tax and bearing on the principles, concept of establishment, returns
to be filed, their verification and the assessments shall be applicable to the
payment of liquor licences.
(2)  Any  person  selling  drinks  subject  to  a  licence  without
authorization or engaged in a business liable to a tax higher than the one initially
levied, shall be automatically assessed for the whole year or on the difference
between the real amount due and the sums already paid.
(3) The penalties relating to business licence, provided for above
shall also apply to liquor licence.
II.
LIQUOR LICENCE TARIFFS
SECTION 44: Liquor licence tariffs are shown on the following table:
Type of activity Activities subject to
business licence
Activities subject to
discharge tax
21

[Page 22]
Liquor licence
class
Basic element Business licence Amount of the discharge
tax
Class 1 Non-alcoholic beverages 2 times the business
licence
1 time the amount of the
discharge tax
Class 2 Alcoholic beverages 4 times the business
licence
2 times the amount of the
discharge tax
CHAPTER III
DISCHARGE TAX
SECTION 45: Taxpayers engaged in a commercial, industrial handicraft or
agro-pastoral  activity  falling  neither  under  the  assessment  based  on  actual
earnings, nor the simplified taxation regime nor the basic regime shall be liable
to a discharge tax exclusive of payment of the business licence, personal income
tax and VAT.
SECTION  46:  (1)  The  discharge  tax  shall  be  assessed  and  issued  by  the
taxation services.
                (2) The rate of discharge tax shall be established by regional and
local  authorities  benefiting  from  the  proceeds  of  this  tax,  within  a  bracket
determined by category of activities as follows:
Categories:
- A: from 0 to 20,000 francs
- B: from 21,001 to 40,000 francs
- C: from 41,001 to 50,000 francs
- D: from 51,001 to 100,000 francs
Councils may classify activities falling under each category and apply specific
rates thereto within the relevant bracket.
22

[Page 23]
(a) Category A shall comprise
- Itinerant barbers;
- Food hawkers;
- Cooked food sellers in make-shift premises;
- Hawkers of carbonated beverages and drinking water on tricycle, hand-
carts or mopeds;
- Tailors  or  dressmakers  with  less  than  five  machines,  apprentices  or
employees, or working alone;
- Owners of grinding machines;
- Hawkers of various articles;
- Itinerant engravers;
- Hairdressers with premises;
- Operators of taps, per tap;
- Hairdressers with one to three employees;
- Craftsmen or manufacturers without any mechanical appliances;
- Engravers operating at home;
- Cafeteria operators;
- "Soya" sellers;
- Motorcycle taxis;
- Goods carriers using hand-carts;
- School canteen operators;
- Watch repairers;
- Foodstuff retailers ("bayam-sellam") without a means of transportation;
- Street vendors of various goods;
- Operators of photocopying machines or typewriters or computers for word
processing  without  premises,  per  photocopying  machine,  typewriter  or
computer;
- Itinerant shoe repairers;
- Raphia or palm wine sellers;
- Wood sculptors;
- Blacksmiths;
- Basket-makers;
- Leather workers;
- Flower vendors;
- Itinerant booksellers;
- Non-salaried lottery and PMUC ticket retailers;
23

[Page 24]
- Repairers of television sets and other audiovisual appliances who do not
sell spare parts;
- Battery chargers and tyre repairers;
- Hides and skin collectors; Retailers of firewood;
- Itinerant vendors of radio-cassettes, watches and clocks;
- Newspaper stands;
- Dormitory owners;
- Charcoal retailers;
- Itinerant photographer;
- Operators of "three-card" gambling games;
- Public scribe;
- Makers of yoghurt , ice cubes or ice-lollipops on a small scale;
- Taxpayers  who depend  on proceeds  from agricultural  activities  with a
turnover of less than one million francs;
- Itinerant pastry vendors;
- Sellers of poles, bamboo and planks;
- Hawkers of recorded audio and video cassettes;
- Operator of a car wash with a water meter without security guard facilities
- Non-salaried sales agent.
(b) Category B shall comprise
- Operators of photocopying machines, typewriters or computers for word
processing with premises and per photocopying machine, typewriter or
computer;
- Traditional healers;
- Traders with a turnover of less than five million francs;
- Restaurant owners with premises;
- Bicycle rental service with less than 10 bicycles;
- Small livestock and poultry sellers with a turnover of less than five million
francs
- Video-club operators;
- Tarpaulin, chair or tableware rental services with a turnover of less than
five million francs;
- Foodstuff retailers with a vehicle;
- Hairdressing salons with three to five employees;
- Passenger transporters to the outskirts of urban centres;
24

[Page 25]
- Studio photographers;
- Operators of cloth printing workshops;
- Dance  or  music  teachers,  sports,  physical  education  and  gymnastic
instructors;
- Tobacconist;
- Retailers of firewood using a vehicle;
- Sellers of fizzy drinks not requiring a business licence;
- Conjurers or illusionists
- Owners of public phone booths with an annual turnover of less than five
million francs;
- Motor  mechanics,  body-work  repairers,  auto  electricians  without
machines;
- Owners of non-alcoholic beverage premises requiring a business licence
with an annual turnover of less than 15 million francs;
- Car wash owners with water meter and vehicle parking facilities;
- Itinerant photographers.
(c) Category C shall comprise
- Home midwife;
- Nurse, masseur;
- Passenger and goods transporters to the outskirts of urban centres;
- Traders with a turnover of 5 to 10 million francs;
- Bicycle rental services with 10 to 20 bicycles;
- Unclassified restaurants;
- Motorcycle rental services with less than 10 motorcycles;
- Jobbers with a turnover of less than five million francs;
- Itinerant salesmen with motor vehicles;
- Collectors of basic commodities;
- Livestock and poultry merchants with a turnover of 5 to 10 million francs;
- Taxi operator and per taxi;
- Owners of hairdressing salons with more than 5 employees;
- Owners of fizzy drinks and wine premises with a turnover of less than 15
million francs;
- Tourist guides;
- Sellers of sand, gravel and quarry stones;
25

[Page 26]
- Owners of public phone booths with an annual turnover of 5 to 10 million
francs;
- Tarpaulin, chair or tableware rental services with a turnover of 5 to 10
million francs,
(d) Category D shall comprise
- Owners of premises selling alcoholic and other beverages with a turnover
of less than 15 million francs;
- Trader with an annual turnover of 10 to 15 million francs;
- Cattle and poultry merchants with a turnover of 10 to 15 million francs;
- Bicycle rental services with more than 20 bicycles;
- Motorcycle rental services with more than 10 motorcycles;
- Manicurists and chiropodists providing beauty care;
- Owners of fizzy drinks and wine premises with a turnover of 10 to 15
million francs;
- Butchers with no refrigerating facilities who sell less than 100 animals a
year;
- Public urban transport and per vehicle.
- Owners of public phone booths with a turnover of 10 to 15 million francs;
- Tarpaulin, chair or tableware rental services with a turnover of 10 to 15
million francs;
- Jobbers with a turnover of 5 to 15 million francs.
SECTION 47: (1) The discharge tax shall be paid per council, per establishment
and per activity where several different activities are carried on in the same
establishment.
(2)  However,  a  hawker  who  shows  proof  of  payment  of the
discharge tax to the council of his place of residence shall not be taxable in other
council areas for the same activity.
(3) It shall be paid quarterly and within fifteen days of the end of
each quarter to the council revenue office using an index card bearing:
- full name and address;
- date of birth or incorporation;
26

[Page 27]
- place of birth or incorporation;
- full name and address of father or manager;
- full name and address of mother;
- nationality;
- registration number;
- location  (head  office  and  respective  establishments  according  to  town,
neighbourhood, street, door number);
- post box number;
- telephone number and, where necessary, e-mail address;
- type of activity;
- amount of turnover and any other information necessary for the assessment
of the discharge tax;
- number of the relevant taxation centre;
- required turn over;
- discharge tax group and category;
- quarter for which payment is made.
 (4) Persons carrying out an activity liable to the discharge tax
shall make a declaration thereof to the taxation service, or to the council office
in areas where there is no taxation service, within 15 days of the start of the said
activity. Such declaration must contain the same information as those specified
in the preceding sub-section.
(5) Persons who, within the year, engage in an activity liable to
the discharge tax shall owe the said tax only from the first day of the quarter
during which the activity was started.

(6) The payment of the discharge tax shall give entitlement to the
issuance of a tax ticket signed by the taxation service, or the mayor in a council
where there is no taxation service.
(7) All taxpayers shall be required to display their discharge tax
ticket  in their  establishment.  For it to be deemed valid, the tax ticket  thus
displayed  should  be  backed  by  a  receipt  confirming  the  payment  of  the
discharge tax.
27

[Page 28]
(8) Failure to display the discharge tax ticket shall entail closure
of the establishment and a tax penalty of 5 000 francs.
(9) All taxpayers shall be required to show their discharge tax
ticket whenever requested to do so by the authorities in charge of tax assessment
and collection.
(10) However, for hawkers and transporters, failure to show the
tax ticket shall entail seizure of non-perishable movable goods or vehicle and
their impoundment by the council under the conditions laid down by law.
(11) Failure to pay the discharge tax within the required time-
limits specified above shall entail concomitantly the automatic and immediate
closure of the establishment(s)  and a penalty of 30% of the amount of tax
payable, without prejudice to sanctions.
(12) Where there is concrete evidence for the calculation of the
actual turnover of more than 15 000 000 francs of a taxpayer subject to the
discharge tax, the taxpayer shall be subject to the business licence, and to the
basic regime, the simplified taxation system or to assessment based on actual
earnings, as the case may be.
In such case, the discharge tax already paid shall constitute a
down  payment  of  the  calculated  an  instalment  of  the  total  amount  of  the
business licence levy.
(13) Taxpayers subject to the discharge tax may opt for the basic
regime. Such a decision shall be irrevocable and also imply opting for the same
System for the VAT.
Consequently, such taxpayers shall make their decision known to the head
of the taxation centre with territorial jurisdiction before the first of February of
the fiscal year.
CHAPTER IV
PROPERTY TAX
28

[Page 29]
SECTION 48: All proceeds from property tax provided for by the General Tax
Code shall be paid to the council of the place where the property is located.
CHAPTER V
 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY
SECTION 49: All proceeds from fees on the transfer of property provided for
by the General Tax Code shall be paid to the council of the place where the
property is located.
CHAPTER VI
TAX ON GAMES OF CHANCE AND GAMES OF ENTERTAINMENT
SECTION  50:  All  proceeds  from  tax  on  games  of  chance  and  games  of
entertainment provided for by the General Tax Code shall be paid to the council
of the place where the establishment is located.
CHAPTER VII
STAMP DUTY ON MOTOR VEHICLES
SECTION 51: All proceeds from stamp duty on motor vehicles provided for by
the  General  Tax  Code  shall  be  paid  to  the  Special  Council  Support  Fund
(FEICOM) or any other body responsible for the centralization and equalization
for redistribution to councils.
CHAPTER VIII
FORESTRY TAXES
SECTION 52: (1) A quota (40%) of proceeds from annual forestry taxes shall
be paid to councils in accordance with the provisions of the General Tax Code.
(2) The quota of annual forest taxes paid to councils shall be
distributed follows:
- 50% as deduction at source for the council of location;
29

[Page 30]
- 50% as the balance centralized by FEICOM or any other body
responsible for the centralization and equalization of proceeds
from tax, fees and royalties due to the councils;
   (3) The centralized balance of annual forest taxes shall be
distributed to all councils under the conditions laid down by law.
PART III
ADDITIONAL COUNCILTAXES
SECTION 53: Additional council taxes shall be established on the following
taxes and duties for the benefit of councils:
- personal income tax;
- company tax;
- value added tax (VAT).
SECTION 54: (1) The rate of additional council taxes shall be 10% of the
principal of the tax concerned.
  (2) Additional council taxes shall be calculated both on the
principal and on the tax increases to which they apply and shall vary according
to the components of the tax base.
 (3)  The  assessment,  issuance  and  collection  as  well  as
proceedings and claims relating to additional council taxes shall be the same as
for the taxes and duties used as basis.
SECTION 55: As assessment and collection fees for the tax revenue collected
for the benefit of regional and local authorities and public bodies, the taxation
service shall deduct 10% of the revenue collected for such regional and local
authorities and public bodies.
30

[Page 31]
SECTION  56:  Proceeds  from  additional  council  taxes  shall  be  distributed
between  the  State  and  FEICOM,  or  any  other  body  responsible  for  the
centralization and equalization, and councils and city councils in accordance
with a regulatory instrument.
ÇHAPTER IV
COUNCIL TAXES
CHAPTER I
LOCAL DEVELOPMENT TAX
SECTION 57: (1) A direct council tax known as the local development tax is
established for the benefit of councils.
                 (2) This tax shall be collected for the basic facilities and
services provided to the populations, notably street lighting, sanitation, refuse
collection, ambulance services, drinking water supply, electrification.
                (3) Proceeds from the local development tax shall be devoted on
a priority basis to the financing of the infrastructure referred to in the preceding
sub-section.
SECTION 58: The maximum rates of the local development tax shall be fixed
as follows:
• For public and private sector employees:
- monthly basic salary ranging between 62, 000 and 75,000
francs: 3,000 francs/year;
- monthly basic salary ranging between 62, 000 and 100,000
francs: 6,000 francs/year;
- monthly basic salary ranging between 100,001 and 125,000
francs: 9, 000 francs/year  ;
31

[Page 32]
- monthly basic salary ranging between  125 001 and 150 000
francs: 12 000 francs/year;
- monthly basic salary ranging between 150,000 and 200,000
francs: 15 000 francs/year;
- monthly basic salary ranging between 200,001 and 250,000
francs: 18 000 francs/year;
- monthly basic salary ranging between 250,001 and 300,000
francs: 24, 000 francs/year ;
- monthly basic salary ranging between 300,001 and 500,000
francs: 27, 000 francs/year ;
- monthly basic salary of more than 500 000 francs: 30 000
francs/year.
• For persons liable to the discharge tax or the business licence:
- principal  tax  equal  to  or  less  than  30  000  francs:  7  500
francs/year;
- principal  tax  ranging  between  30,001  and  60,000  francs:
9,000 francs/year;
- principal  tax  ranging  between  60,001  and  100,000  francs:
15,000 francs/year;
- principal tax ranging between 100,001 and 150,000 francs:
22,500 francs/year;
- principal tax ranging between 150,001 and 200,000 francs:
30,000 francs/year;
- principal tax ranging between 200,001 and 300,000 francs:
45,000 francs/year;
- principal tax ranging between 300,001 and 400,000 francs:
60,000 francs/year;
- principal tax ranging between 400 001 and 500 000 francs: 75
000 francs/year;
- principal tax of more than 500 000 francs: 90 000 francs/year.
32

[Page 33]
SECTION 59: The local development tax shall be collected at the same time as
the Personal income tax, the discharge tax and the business licence.
SECTION  60:  The  assessment,  issuance,  collection,  time-limit,  sanctions,
judicial  proceedings  and  claims  relating  to  the  local  development  tax  shall
comply with procedure applicable to taxes and duties on the basis of which they
are assessed.
CHAPTER II
OTHER COUNCIL LEVIES
I.
COUNCIL LEVIES
SECTION 61: The municipal council may vote duties and taxes known as
"council levies" for the council budget.
SECTION 62: Council levies shall comprise:
- the cattle slaughter tax;
- the council cattle tax;
- the firearms tax;
- the hygiene and sanitation tax;
- impoundment fees;
- market fees;
- building permit or lay-out fees;
- temporary public highway occupation fees
- parking fees;
- car park occupation duties;
- quay ticket;
- entertainment tax;
- playground fees;
- advertising tax;
- council stamp duty;
- road degradation fees;
- the council transit or transhumance tax;
- the quarry products transportation tax;
33

[Page 34]
- parking fees;
- the by-product tax.
II.
SLAUGHTER TAX
SECTION 63: The slaughter tax shall be paid by the butcher for livestock killed
in slaughterhouses constructed or managed by the council.
SECTION  64:  The  maximum  rates  of  the  slaughter  tax  shall  be  fixed  as
follows:
- bovine and equine livestock: 1000 francs per head;
- porcine livestock:    400 francs per head;
- ovine and caprine livestock:    250 francs per head.
SECTION 65: (1) The amount of the slaughter tax shall be calculated by the
assessment  services  of  the  council  and  collected  by  the  Council  Revenue
Collector.
(2) It shall be paid by the butcher before the slaughter.
(3) In the event of fraudulent slaughter, a penalty shall be imposed
per head of stock killed, respectively 10000 francs for bovines and 5000 francs
for porcine, ovine and caprine livestock, without prejudice to the sanctions
provided for by the regulations in force.
III.
COUNCIL CATTLE TAX
III.I.
SCOPE OF APPLICATION
SECTION 66: Every owner or keeper of bovine livestock shall pay an annual
tax calculated per head of livestock owned.
34

[Page 35]
III. II.
EXEMPTIONS
SECTION 67: The following shall be exempt from the tax:
- plough animals;
- animals belonging to the State;
- sires imported from abroad;
- animals reared and used by charity institutions exclusively for
social-welfare purposes.
III.III
ASSESSMENT, RATE AND PAYMENT
SECTION 68: (1) Cattle tax shall be paid by persons liable on declaration at the
Council of the place where the herd is located.
(2) The livestock headcount shall be carried out by the Council of
the place where the herd is located in conjunction with the livestock service.
SECTION 69: (1) The annual rate shall be 200 to 500 francs per head of cattle.
 (2) Payment of cattle tax shall not bar the levying of discharge tax
or Personal income tax where applicable.
SECTION 70: (1) Cattle tax shall be due on 1 January of the fiscal year.

(2) Proceeds from the cattle tax, which shall be paid voluntarily
no  later  than  15  March  on  the  declaration  of  the  person  liable  or  his
representative, shall be intended for the council of the place where the cattle is
located.
III. IV.
PENALTIES
SECTION 71: Failure to pay the tax shall entail seizure and impoundment of
the livestock.
35

[Page 36]
SECTION 72: Any concealment of taxable livestock or any false declaration
shall give rise to impoundment and a 100% penalty.
IV.
FIREARMS TAX
IV. I.
SCOPE OF APPLICATION
SECTION 73: (1) Every owner of a firearm shall, on the declaration of such
owner no later than 15 March of each year, be required to pay an annual tax to
the council of the place where such firearm is located, in accordance with the
following rates:

- trade gun 2000 francs;
- smooth barrel sporting shot-gun 15,000 francs;
- gallery rifle 15,000 francs;
- rifled arm 2 000 francs;
- revolver and pistol 2000 francs.
(2) The Sub-divisional Officer and Mayor shall draw up the list
of firearm owners no later than 15 March of each year.
(3) Obsolete arms shall cease to be taxed only when they have
been deposited in the office of the Sub-divisional Officer for destruction against
a receipt.
IV. II.
EXEMPTIONS
SECTION 74: The following shall be exempt from this tax:
- firearms belonging to the State;
- service  revolvers  and  pistols  belonging  to  servicemen  in
active service and reserve officers;
- firearms in shops and commercial warehouses so long as they
have not been brought into use.
36

[Page 37]
IV. III.
ASSESSMENT AND PAYMENT  :
SECTION 75.-The firearms tax shall be assessed, issued and paid to the council
of the place where the firearms are located against a receipt.
IV.IV
PENALTIES
SECTION 76. - Any concealment of taxable firearms, unlawful ownership or
any false declaration shall give rise to a 100% penalty.
V.
HYGIENE AND SANITATION TAX
SECTION 77: (1) A hygiene and sanitation tax shall be paid to the council for
the control of foodstuffs and commercial industrial buildings.
(2) The amount of the hygiene and sanitation tax shall be fixed as
follows:
- foodstuffs sold in the open: from 500 to 1 000 francs
per quarter;
- foodstuffs sold in a shop: from 1 000 to 1 500 francs
per quarter;
- buildings : from 10,000 to 25,000 francs annually.
(3) The amount of tax shall be fixed by resolution of the municipal
council.
(4) Any violation of the rules of hygiene and sanitation shall be
punishable with a penalty of 100% of the amount of the tax due.
(5) The conditions for the application of this tax shall be laid down
by law.
37

[Page 38]
VI.
IMPOUNDMENT FEES
SECTION 78: (1) Stray animals, vehicles and All objects found without a
custodian or placed in violation of road regulations may be seized and placed in
the  impound  from  where  they  can  be  removed  only  upon  payment  of
impoundment fees.
(2) These fees may be collected only insofar as the animals, vehicles and
other objects found on the public highway are effectively kept by the council.
SECTION 79: (1) The rates of impoundment fees shall be fixed within the
following maximum limits:
- heavy livestock: from 5,000 to 10,000 francs per head and per day;
- small livestock: from 2 000 to 5 000 francs per head and per day;
- pets : from 2 000 to 5 000 francs per head and per day;
- heavy vehicles and equipment : from 10,000 to 50,000 per vehicle and
per day;
- other vehicles : from 5,000 to 15,000 per vehicle and per day;
- motorcycles: from 1 000 to 5 000 francs per motorcycle and per day;
- other objects : from 1 000 to 3 000 francs per object and per day.
(2) Impounded fees shall be collected by the Council Revenue
Collector on the basis of a collection order issued by the competent Municipal
Officer.
(3) The council may auction the animals, vehicles or objects that
have  not  been  claimed  following  a  notification  30  (thirty)  days  after
impoundment, in accordance with the regulations in force.
VII.
MARKET FEES
38

[Page 39]
SECTION  80:  (1) Market  fees  shall  be  collected  from regular  traders  and
occasional vendors occupying a place in any market within the jurisdiction of a
council.
(2) Regular traders shall pay fixed fees while occasional vendors
or those without a permanent place shall pay daily fees.
(3) The fixing of the rates of these fees shall take into account the
disparities  in  living  standards,  specialization  of  the  markets  concerned  and
distance from the major supply centres.
(4) Market fees shall be the same for all traders, whether or not
they are domiciled in the locality, any difference in rates being due solely to the
surface area occupied.
VII. I.
FIXED FEES

SECTION  81:  (1)  The  municipal  council  shall  set  the  fixed  monthly  fees
applicable to permanent shops or stands built in markets.
(2) Shops or stands may be allocated by competitive bidding or
by direct negotiation.
SECTION 82: (1) A contract must be signed between the permanent shop or
stand occupant and the council.
(2) The contract must include the following information:
- identity of the tenant;
- occupant's single identifier;
- location of the market (town, neighbourhood, named locality);
- cadastral reference of the market;
- shop number;
- surface area of the premises;
- amount of monthly fee;
- duration of lease;
- type of business.
39

[Page 40]
(3)  Any  subleasing  shall  be  strictly  forbidden.  It  shall  be
punishable  by  a  penalty  of  200%  of  the  fees  due  without  prejudice  to
administrative sanctions and legal proceedings.
SECTION 83: (1) The rate of lease of council shops applicable in markets shall
be fixed as follows:
- up to 4 m²  from 5 000 to 10 000 francs per month;
- from 4,01 to 6 m² from 10,001 to 15 000 francs per month;
- from 6,01 to 8 m² from 15,001 to 20,000 francs per month;
- from 8.01 m2
to 10 m² from 20,001 to 25,000 francs per month;
- from 10,01 to 12 m² from 25,001 to 30,000 francs per month;
- from 12,01 to 14 m² from 30,001 to 35,000 francs per month;
- from 14.01 to 16 m² from 35,001 to 40,000 francs per month;
- from 16.01 to 18 m² from 40,001 to 45,000 francs per month;
- from 18.01 to 20 m² from 45,001 to 50,000 francs per month;
- from 20.01 to 22 m² from 50,001 to 55,000 francs per month;
- from 22.01 to 24 m² from 55.001 to 60,000 francs per month;
- more than 24 m² from 60,001 to 70,000 francs per month;
 (2) Failure to pay a term of shop rents after a 15-day notification,
the shop shall be placed under seal, in accordance with the regulations in force.
(3) The seals may be removed only upon the payment of a
penalty of 5 000 francs in addition to the sums owed.
VII. II.
DAILY FEES
SECTION 84: (1) The occasional vendors and traders without permanent place
in the market shall pay a daily market fee the amount of which shall be fixed by
the municipal council. It shall range between 100 and 500 francs per vendor.
(2) Failure to pay, the goods shall be confiscated and may be
restored only upon payment of a penalty corresponding to a fee in addition to the
fee normally due.
40

[Page 41]
SECTION 85: (1) The sale of goods on pavements and other public spaces,
outside marketplaces, shall remain prohibited.
(2)  In  the  event  of  where  occupation  is  established  by  the
competent council, the vendors concerned shall pay a penalty ranging between 5
000 and 10 000 francs per day.
(3) Failure to pay the penalty referred to above or to leave the
pavement, the goods of the vendors in breach of the law shall be impounded.
SECTION 86: (1) The shop rents and proceeds from the sale of tickets shall be
collected by an intermediate revenue officer against a receipt drawn from a
secured counterfoil booklet and bearing a printed facial value equal to a term of
the monthly rent or cost of the ticket.
(2) The total sum collected shall be paid into the account of the
municipal revenue collector within 24 hours on the presentation of a collection
order by the competent municipal authority.
VIII.
BUILDING PERMIT TAXES
SECTION  87:  Building  permit  taxes  shall  be  collected  on  any  building
constructed in the headquarters of the council or in suburbs that was the subject
of approved town-planning.
SECTION 88: (1) The rate of building permit taxes voted by the municipal
council for budgets shall be fixed at 1% of the value of the building.
(2) It  shall  apply  to major  renovation  works  as  well as  new
buildings.
(3) The amount of taxes shall be established on the basis of an
estimate approved by the council technical services or, where need be, by those
acting in that capacity.
SECTION 89: (1) Any execution of work without the prior payment of taxes
shall render the builder liable to a penalty the amount which shall be 30% of the
41

[Page 42]
taxes due. The penalty shall be paid to the council. It shall not exempt the guilty
party from the payment of the main building permit taxes.
(2) Failure to obtain the building permit tax shall not lead to the
demolition of the building, except in the cases referred to in Section 125 of Law
No. 2004 of 21 April 2004 governing town planning in Cameroon.
SECTION  90: The building  permit  taxes shall  be collected  by the  council
revenue  collector  on  the basis  of a  paying-in  slip  issued by  the competent
municipal authorizing officer. The payment thereof shall determine the issue of
the building permit.
IX.
TEMPORARY OCCUPATION FEES OF THE PUBLIC
THOROUGHFARE
SECTION 91: (1) The temporary occupation fees of the public thoroughfare
may be collected by the council in the event of the occupation of a thoroughfare
or its right-of-way, by the disposal of materials,  in particular, sand, stones,
wood, exhibition of furniture, goods or any other object.
(2) The occupation of a public highway or its accesses shall be
enforced.
(3)  The  following  shall  not  be  liable  to  the  public  highway
temporary occupation fees:
- service stations;
- vehicles;
- advertising media.
SECTION 92: (1) Any temporary occupation of the public highway shall be
subject to a prior authorization of the competent head of the municipal executive
who shall  determine  the duration  thereof.  The payment  of the fees  relating
thereto shall be effected at the counter of the municipal revenue collector on
presentation of the authorization.
42

[Page 43]
(2)  Except  in  the  case  of  force  majeure,  any  unauthorized
occupation  of  the  public  highway  or  dumping  of  materials  without  the
authorization of the municipality may, failing impounding be subject to the
payment of a tax equal to double the fees due.
SECTION 93: (1) The rate for temporary occupation of the public highway
shall be voted by the municipal council at a maximum rate of 2 000 francs per
square metre per day.
(2) The non-authorization or reduction in the area occupied or
late payment shall entail the payment of a fine of 100% of the amount of the
principal due.
(3)  In  the  absence  of  the  owner,  caretaker  or  any  official
answerable for the highway occupation requirements, the council shall, after
notification by posting or radio, proceed to impounding the abovementioned
property.
X.
 PARKING TAX
SECTION 94: (1) The parking tax shall be paid by any vehicle used for the
urban transportation of persons exclusively in towns and built-up areas where
the municipalities have set up parking lots or developed a traffic plan.
(2) Following the payment of this tax, the council shall develop
areas for parking, notably: around offices, factories and markets.
SECTION 95: The quarterly maximum rate of the parking tax shall be fixed as
follows:
 :
- motor-taxis: 3 000 francs
- taxis: 10 000 francs
- buses: 15 000 francs.
SECTION  96:  (1)  The  parking  tax  shall  be  paid  within  the  fifteen  days
following the beginning of each quarter in the council of residence of the carrier.
The residence shall be determined by the business licence or discharge tax.
43

[Page 44]
(2) The payment of the parking tax shall be effected against the
issue of a ticket based on the model of the vehicle tax sticker.
(3) Any counterfeiting or fraudulent sale of tickets of the parking
tax shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of the penal code.
(4) Failure to present the parking tax ticket or the document in
lieu thereof, recorded in a report, shall entail the impounding of the vehicle
notwithstanding the payment of the principal of the tax.
XI.
 TAXES FOR THE.OCCUPATION OF PARKING LOTS
SECTION  97:  Taxes  for  the  occupation  of  parking  lots  shall  be  paid  by
operators of vehicles used for the public transportation of goods and persons
such as cars, trucks, vans and buses.
SECTION 98: (1) The maximum rate for the occupation of parking lots in the
areas developed shall be fixed as follows, on the basis of the type of vehicle and
payable to the council where the parking lot is located:
- cars and vans: 1 000 francs per day;
- trucks and buses: 2 000 francs per day.
(2) The parking lot tax shall be paid against a ticket issued by the
council.
(3) Failure to pay the parking lot tax or parking out of the parking
lot, where it is established  by a report,  shall entail impounding the vehicle
notwithstanding the payment of the principal of the tax.
XII.
 PLATFORM TICKET
SECTION 99: (1) Boarding in a bus station or in a developed municipal landing
stage shall be subject to the payment of a platform ticket voted by the municipal
council as follows:
44

[Page 45]
(a) Bus station: 250 francs per loading
(b) Landing stage:
- boat without engine: 200 francs per loading;
- engine  boat  with  less  than  10  seats:  500  francs  per
loading;
- engine boat with more than 10 seats: 1 000 francs per
loading.
(2) The platform ticket shall be paid exclusively to the council
where the boarding takes place.
(3) Vehicles not loading in the developed bus stations, excluding
the  approved  travelling  agencies,  shall  equally  be  liable  to  payment  of  the
platform ticket.

(4) Failure to pay the platform ticket shall entail payment of a
fine of 100% of the amount of the principal due.
XIII
 ENTERTAINMENT TAX
SECTION 100: (1) Entertainment tax shall be paid to the council for ail profit-
making festivities organized usually or occasionally.
(2) Under this law, an entertainment is occasional when it takes
place in the open or in any other public place or open to public.
(3) This tax applies notably to the activities organized in the
following establishments:
- cinema halls;
- dancing halls;
- theatre, concert, show halls;
- cabarets, night clubs, discothèques;
45

[Page 46]
- cafés, bar dancing;
- video clubs.
(4) Entertainments organized for charitable purposes shall be
exempted from the payment of the entertainment tax.
SECTION 101: (1) The tax rate for the usual entertainment shall be fixed on the
basis  of  the  type  of  entertainment  following  deliberation  by  the  municipal
council within the ceiling of 10 000 francs to 100 000 francs per quarter and per
establishment.
(2) The tax rate for occasional entertainment shall be fixed by
the municipal council. The ceilings shall range from 5 000 francs to 50 000
francs per day of entertainment.
(3) The entertainment tax shall be collected by the municipal
revenue  collector  following  a  receipt  document  issued  by  the  competent
municipal authorizing officer.
(4) Failure to pay the tax shall entail the stopping of the
entertainment or closing of the hall, in accordance with the provisions of the
instruments in force.
(5) The seals shall be removed only following the payment of a
fine corresponding to 100% of the amount of the principal due.
XIV
IMPOUNDMENT FEES
SECTION 102: (1) Stadium fees may be voted by the municipal council at 5%
of the funds collected from the stadiums located within the jurisdiction of the
council  during  sports  events  or  popular  entertainments  when  entry  into  the
stadium is payable.
(2) The payment of these fees shall make it mandatory for the
council to:
- maintain the roads leading to the stadium;
- maintain and provide light to the areas surrounding the stadium.
46

[Page 47]
(3) The stadium fees shall be collected by the city council or the
district council as the case may be.
 (4) Failure to pay the fees due within a period of 8 (eight) days
after the end of the entertainment shall entail the payment of a fine of 100% of
the amount of the principal due.
XV
 ADVERTISING TAX
SECTION 103: (1) The advertising tax shall be levied on local advertising,
notably  on  advertising  billboards,  banners  and  neon  signs,  vehicles  with or
without a distributor, magazines with sound System, bills, oriflammes.
(2) The advertising tax rate shall be fixed as follows:
a) Bilboards, banners and neon signs : 1500 per m2
 and per year;

      b) Vehicle with distributor:
- non residents: 1 000 francs per day and per vehicle;
- residents: 30 000 francs per year and per vehicle.
     c) Vehicles without distributor:
- non residents: 200 francs to 500 francs per day and per vehicle;
- residents: 5 000 francs to 10 000 francs per year and per vehicle.
     d) Magazines with sound System: 500 francs per day.
(3) Failure to pay the advertising tax shall entail payment of a fine
of 100% of the amount of the principal due.
(4) The neon signs placed at the front of commercial and industrial
establishments to indicate their location shall be exempted from the payment of
the advertising tax.
XVI
COUNCIL STAMP DUTY
47

[Page 48]
SECTION 104: (1) The council stamp duty shall be voted by the council for the
council budget.
                   (2) The council stamp duty shall be fixed at 200 francs for the
council budget. It shall be pasted on a document with a format less than or equal
to a page of A4 format, notably:
- a copy or extract of a civil status document;
- the material legalization or certification of signature or document;
- a supplementary judgment;
- proxy;
- service-related bills forwarded to the council;
- any petition forwarded to the municipal officer.
(3) Any document exceeding the dimension of the abovementioned basic
format shall be subject to the payment of a stamp duty of 400 francs.
XVII
FEES FOR ROAD DETERIORATION
SECTION 105: Fees for road deterioration shall be paid by concessionaries and
other contractors carrying out works on the public highway and by drivers of
non-pneumatic engines whose works and circulation deteriorate the road. Any
other form of road deterioration shall be subject to the same tax.
SECTION 106: (1) Maximum fixed rate of the fee for road deterioration shall
be as follows:
(a) Digging, piping and other forms of deterioration:
- thick-tarred road: 90 000 francs to 200 000 francs per m2
;
- tarred road : 45 000 francs to 100 000 francs per m2
;
- earth road : 15,000 francs to 50 000 francs per m2
(b) deterioration by caterpillars:
- tarred road : 50,000 francs to 100 000 francs per m2
;
48

[Page 49]
- earth road : 20,000 francs to 50 000 francs per m2
(2) Where authorized by the municipal authority, the tax for road
deterioration  shall  be  collected  by  the  municipal  revenue  collector  on
presentation of the prior authorization and the receipt document issued by the
head of the council executive.
   (3) Persons who carry out piping or digging works and use the
engines referred to under this section without the prior municipal authorization
shall  be  liable  to  pay  a fine  of  100%  of the amount of the principal  due,
notwithstanding the penalties provided for by the laws and regulations in force.
XVIII
TRANSIT OR TRANSHUMANCE COMMUNAL TAX

SECTION 107: (1) The transit tax shall be collected by the councils on the
cattle from the neighbouring State.
(2) Where the herd in transit stay for more than 15 days on the territory of
the same council, they shall, save in the case of force majeure, be considered to
be on transhumance therein with effect from the 16th
 day.
(3) The transit tax rates shall be fixed as follows:
- cattle and horses : 200 francs to 500 francs per cattle head and per
council;
- sheep and goats: 100 francs to 300 francs per cattle head and per
council.
(4) The transit and transhumance taxes shall be collected by the Municipal
Revenue  Collector,  with the assistance,  as and when necessary, of
representatives  of  the  traditional  authorities  and  if  need  be  of
veterinary service officers.
(5) The Municipal Revenue Collector shall be the only person authorized
to collect the revenue against a receipt from the counterfoil book duly
49

[Page 50]
numbered  and  initialled  by  the  relevant  services  of  the  council
concerned.
(6) The Municipal Revenue Collector, the representatives of traditional
authorities and the veterinary services shall be entitled to a discount for
each cattle head controlled. The discount amount shall be fixed following
deliberation by the municipal council.
(7) The traditional chiefs shall, in addition, be entitled to a remission fixed
following deliberation by the municipal council, for their participation
in the control of herds and damages subsequently caused by the latter
in their territory.
(8) In the event of fraud, by the owner or shepherd of the cattle subject to
transhumance or transit tax to conceal all or part of the cattle to be
controlled, the offender shall be liable to a fine of 100% of the amount
of the principal due for each undeclared animal.
XIX
TAX ON TRANSPORTATION OF QUARRY PRODUCTS
SECTION 108: The tax on transportation of quarry and other products may be
instituted by the municipal  council for the budget of the council where the
quarry is located. It shall apply to the vehicles transporting products of the
exploitation concerned, other than those of the exploiter.
SECTION 109: The maximum rates applicable shall vary on the basis of the
type of vehicle as follows:
- less than 6 tonnes: 1 000 francs per truck and per trip;
- 6 to 10 tonnes : 2 000 francs per truck and per trip;
- more than 10 tonnes: 3 000 francs per truck and per trip.
SECTION 110: (1) The tax on the transportation of quarry products shall be
collected  by  the  municipal  revenue  office  against  a  receipt  from  a  secured
counterfoil book and indicating the nominal value of the tariff voted by the
municipal council.
50

[Page 51]
(2)  Failure  to  pay  the  tax  for  the  transportation  of  quarry
products shall entail the impounding of the vehicle.
XX
FEES FOR THE OCCUPATION OF PARKING LOTS
SECTION 111: (1) Fees for the occupation of parking lots may be voted for the
council  budget  for  the  occupation,  by  private  vehicles,  of  the  parking  lots
developed or constructed by the council.
(2) The parking lots developed for government services shall
not be subject to payment of the fee.
SECTION 112: (1) The rates for the parking lot fees shall be fixed as follows:
- 100 francs per hour.
   For reserved parking lots:
- 500 francs per day and per parking lot;
- 15,000 francs per month and per parking lot.
(2) The parking lot fees shall be paid in advance and collected by
the municipal revenue collector against a receipt from a secured counterfoil
book and indicating the nominal value of the time tariff voted by the municipal
council.
(3) Failure to pay the parking lot fees shall, in addition to the
amount of the principal, be liable to the following fines:
- 1000 francs per hourly rates of 100 francs;
- 5 000 francs per daily rates of 500 francs;
- 50 000 francs per monthly rates of 15 000 francs.
XXI
TAX ON SALVAGED PRODUCTS
51

[Page 52]
SECTION 113: (1) The salvaging of products from non-communal and non-
community  forests  shall  entail,  save  otherwise  provided  for,  payment  of  a
compensatory  contribution  to  the  council  of  the  locality,  known  as  tax  on
salvaged products.
(2) The tax on salvaged products shall be paid by the owner of
the salvaged products to the tune of 2 000 francs per m3
.
(3) Failure to pay the tax on salvaged products shall entail seizure
of the salvaged products and payment of a fine of 100% of the fees of the
principal due.
PART V
SPECIAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO CITY COUNCILS
SINGLE CHAPTER
DISTRIBUTION OF DUTIES AND TAXES BETWEEN THE CITY
COUNCILS AND SUBDIVISIONAL COUNCILS
SECTION 114: The city councils and subdivisional councils shall be entitled to
the same revenue as the councils, subject to the provisions referred to under
Section 115 and 116 below.
SECTION 115: (1) The fiscal revenue of the city council shall comprise:
- proceeds from business licence and liquor licences;
- proceeds from additional council taxes;
- proceeds from multi-purpose stadium fees;
- proceeds from automotive stamp duty on motor vehicles;
- proceeds from local development tax;
- proceeds from advertising tax;
- proceeds from   taxes on the occupation of the parking lots of the
city council;
- proceeds from tax on game of chance and entertainment;
- proceeds from taxes on stands on city council markets;
- proceeds from impounding taxes for the city council;
52

[Page 53]
- proceeds from building or settlement permit taxes;
- proceeds from the parking tax;
- proceeds from communal stamp duty.
 (2) Tax revenue of the district council shall comprise:
- proceeds from the discharge tax;
proceeds from additional council taxes;
- proceeds from the communal cattle tax;
- proceeds from the forestry equalization royalty;
- proceeds from the cattle slaughter tax;
- proceeds from taxes on stands in district council markets;
- proceeds from taxes on the temporary occupation of the public highway;
- proceeds from hygiene and sanitation tax;
- proceeds from taxes on the parking lots of the district council;
- proceeds from stadium taxes excluding multi-purpose stadiums;
- proceeds from entertainment tax;
- proceeds from communal transit or transhumance tax;
- proceeds from tax on the transportation of quarry products;
- proceeds from impounding tax the district council;
- proceeds from firearm tax;
- proceeds from the salvaging tax.
(3) The tax revenue shared between the city council and district
councils shall comprise:
- proceeds from the property tax at the rate of:
 60% for the city council;
 20% for subdivisional councils;
 20% for FEICOM.
- proceeds from real estate transfer tax at the rate of:
 60% for the city council;
 20% for subdivisional councils;
 20% for FEICOM.
53

[Page 54]
PART VI
INTER-COUNCIL AND EQUALIZATION TAX REVENUE
SECTION 116: (1) Twenty percent (20%) of the proceeds from the tax revenue
of the following regional and local authorities shall be deducted and allocated to
FEICOM or any other body in charge of centralization and equalization for the
financing of the council, city council and council union projects:
- proceeds from the parking tax;
- proceeds from the additional council taxes for councils;
- proceeds from business licences;
- proceeds from licences;
- proceeds from real estate property tax.
(2) The following proceeds from local taxes shall be centralized
and redistributed to all councils and city councils:
- 70% of additional council taxes;
- 50% of the annual forestry royalty allocated to councils;
- 100% of stamp duty on motor vehicles.
SECTION 117: (1) A share of the proceeds referred to under Section 116 above
shall be redistributed to councils and city councils according to the criteria and
conditions laid down by the regulations.

(2)  Council  unions  and  other  council  groupings  may  receive
assistance  from  the  abovementioned  body,  under  the  same  conditions  as
councils.
PART VII
REGIONAL TAXES AND LEVIES
SECTION 118: All or part of the following proceeds from local taxes shall be
allocated to the regions:
54

[Page 55]
- stamp duty on vehicle certificates;
- airport stamp duty;
- axle tax;
- royalties on forest, wildlife and fishery resources;
- royalties on water resources;
- royalties on petroleum resources;
- taxes or royalties on mineral resources;
- royalty on fishery and livestock resources;
- taxes and/or royalties on energy resources;
- taxes and/or royalties on tourist resources;
- aerospace taxes and/or royalties;
- taxes and/or royalties on gas sector resources;
- road usage royalty;
- taxes on the exploitation of establishments considered as dangerous,
unhealthy or obnoxious;
- any other tax, duty or royalty allocated by the State.
SECTION  119:  (1)  Jurisdiction  in  respect  of  assessment,  issuance  and
collection of taxes, levies and royalties for regions shall devolve on the relevant
taxation services of the State and councils.
(2) The proceeds from or share of taxes, levies and royalties for
regions shall be issued and collected on separate slips and receipts prepared for
FEICOM or any other body in charge of centralization or equalization, for the
purpose of centralization and distribution thereof to the regions.
(3) The conditions of distribution, centralization and payment of
tax revenue to regions shall be laid down by the regulations.
PART VIII
FISCAL PROCEDURE SPECIFIC TO COUNCIL TAXES
   SPECIFIQUES AUX IMPOTS LOCAUX
CHAPTER I
 GENERAL PROVISIONS
55

[Page 56]
SECTION 120: The provisions of the Manual of Tax Procedure of the General
Tax  Code  shall  apply,  mutatis  mutandis,  to  the  taxes,  duties  and  levies  of
regional and local authorities, subject to the specificities provided for in this law.
SECTION 121: The issuance and collection of indirect council taxes shall not
be subject to concession, under pain of nullity.
CHAPTER II
OBLIGATIONS OF TAXPAYERS
I.
PRIOR REGISTRATION OBLIGATION
SECTION 122: Any natural person or corporate body liable to payment of a
local tax or levy, including indirect council taxes, shall be required to file for
prior registration under the conditions laid down by the General Tax Code.
II.
OBLIGATION TO FILE RETURNS
SECTION 123: (1) Council tax, additional council tax and royalty returns for
regional and local authorities shall be filed under the conditions and time-limits
provided by the law.
(2) Council tax returns shall be filed at the council assessment
services, under the conditions and time-limits laid down for each of the said
taxes.
(3) A taxpayer liable to the council taxes who fails to file a return
within the time-limit prescribed by this law shall be reminded to file a return
within  the  conditions  and  time-limits  provided  for  by  the  manual  of  tax
procedure of the General Tax Code.
CHAPTER III
THE ISSUING OF LOCAL TAXES
56

[Page 57]
SECTION 124: The issuing of some taxes whose proceeds are shared shall be
done through separate collection orders on the letterhead of the regional or local
authority and or the beneficiary bodies.
SECTION 125: (1) Council, local development and additional council taxes
shall be calculated and issued by State taxation services.
                             (2) Their issue shall be done on separate issue rolls or if need
be  on  recovery  notices  on  the  letterhead  of  the  regional  or  local  authority
concerned and or the beneficiary bodies.
SECTION 126: Council taxes shall be calculated and issued by the council
assessment service.
CHAPTER IV
COLLECTION OF LOCAL TAXES
I
AMICABLE COLLECTION

SECTION  127:  (1)  Council  taxes  calculated  and  issued  by  State  taxation
services shall be paid voluntarily by taxpayers to the competent tax collector
subject to the provisions relating to the discharge tax.
(2)  Revenue  collected  by  the  tax  collector  shall  be  paid  to  the
beneficiaries within seventy-two (72) hours against a receipt and after seeing the
log book and the daily report.
(3) In their returns and transfer orders, major companies shall indicate the
shares  going  to  regional  and  local  authorities  and  other  bodies.  The
corresponding amounts shall be transferred directly to them against a receipt.
(4)  The  regional  and  local  authorities  benefiting  from  transfers  from
taxpayers belonging to the structure in charge of major companies within the
General Directorate of Taxes shall, at the end of each month, forward to the
Directorate a list of the payment orders effectively received and the receipts
issued.
57

[Page 58]
(5) Regional and local authorities and other corporate bodies governed by
Cameroon law shall keep an analytical account of issues and collections of
taxes, duties, levies, and royalties calculated for them for the follow-up of their
tax revenue in general and particularly in taxation centres and in the structure in
charge of major companies.
(6) A log book for issues and collections shall be kept in each taxation
centre for each regional or local authority or beneficiary body as well as a daily
report on the taxes and levies raised for the different beneficiaries.
(7) The log book shall contain:
- the number and date of the issue roll;
- the business name or the names, surnames and address of the
taxpayer;
- the detailed amounts of the taxes and levies per beneficiary;
- the number and dates of the payment and transfer receipts and, if
need be, of payment orders.
(8) The daily report shall contain:
- the nature of the different taxes and levies,
- the identification of beneficiaries,
- global amount per tax and levy for each beneficiary,
- the number of issue rolls and payment receipts established or
printed;
- the amount, number and date of the transfer receipt issued by
each of the beneficiaries.
SECTION 128 :(l) Any person having to pay a local tax or levy shall do so in
the tax office or in the local tax office within the time limit and conditions laid
down by law.
(2) The payment of council taxes shall be done in cash, by cheque or by
bank transfer.
58

[Page 59]
(3) The local tax officer, the tax collector or failing that the competent
treasury accountant shall issue receipts for all payments received.
(4) A duplicate can be issued to the taxpayer or to the intermediary agent
who so requests.
SECTION 129 : Any person liable to council tax shall pay it at the competent
municipal revenue office.
II.
FORCEFUL RECOVERY
SECTION 130: (1) Failure to pay local taxes within the prescribed time limit
shall be subject to forceful recovery in accordance with the Manual of Tax
Procedure of the General Tax Code, subject to specificities provided for by this
law.
(2) In case of non-payment of council tax within the time-limit prescribed
by law, the council shall issue a direct writ of execution and proceed with the
seizure of goods, property or animals.
(3) The council may, within thirty (30) days with effect from the date of
seizure, auction the seized goods, property or animals.
(4) During the period of seizure, the feeding and care given to the seized
animals shall be borne by their defaulting owner.
(5) The cost inherent in the conservation of seized perishable goods and
foodstuffs shall be borne by their defaulting owners.
(6) The sale of seized goods shall be authorized by the chief executive of
the council and executed by the bearer of the coercion in the form of sales
carried out by legal procedure.
(7) Proceeds from sales shall be paid directly to the municipal revenue
collector who shall issue a receipt and keep the surplus until the calculation of
costs.
59

[Page 60]
(8) Each sale shall be carried out by the municipal revenue collector and
shall give rise to a report.
(9) Any seizure or sale contrary to the formalities prescribed by this book
may give rise to legal proceedings against the perpetuators and the cost borne by
them.
(10)  Council  tax  recovery  officers  shall  benefit  from  the  regime  of
protection of public officials provided for by the Penal Code.
(11) In case of insult, they shall submit a report to the State Counsel.
SECTION 131: (1) The accounting documents and portfolio investments for the
usage of or belonging to regional and local authorities shall be secured.
(2) The conditions of purchase, reception and management of the
abovementioned documents and investments shall be laid down by statutory
regulations.
III.
CONTROL
SECTION 132: The control of council levies shall be carried out jointly by the
competent State services and those of the council.
SECTION 133: (1) The control of local taxes shall be carried out either by the
competent State services or by the council.
(2) Some control operations may be carried out jointly by State
services and by those of the council.
SECTION 134: Council employees shall expressly be mandated and provided
with  a  mission  note  issued  by  the  competent  authority  for  their  control  of
council levies from taxpayers to be valid.
IV.
PRESCRIPTION
60

[Page 61]
SECTION 135: (1) The amounts owed by taxpayers as indirect council levies
shall be extinguished after a period of two (2) years following the date on which
they were due if no other decision had been taken to avoid the prescription.
(2) Within a period of one (1) year from the payment of levies,
prescription shall be granted regional or local authorities against any application
for the refund of amounts paid as direct council levies.
CHAPTER V
LOCAL TAX DISPUTES
I.
CONTENTIOUS JURISDICTION
SECTION 136: Petitions for local tax disputes shall be governed by the rules
and procedure laid down in the manual of tax procedure, subject to the specific
provisions governing council taxes.
SECTION 137: Claims relating to council taxes shall be brought before the
contentious  jurisdiction  where  they  seek  either  redress  for  erroneous  tax
assessment or calculation, or the grant of a right arising from a law or regulation.
SECTION 138: (1) Any taxpayer who feels wrongly levied a council tax may
submit a written claim to the head of the municipal council within a period of 30
(thirty) days  from the date of issue of the tax claim or the date of certain
knowledge of the levy.
(2)  The  above-mentioned  claim  shall,  under  pain  of
inadmissibility, comprise:
- an application bearing fiscal and communal stamps and duly signed by the
claimant or the claimant's representative;
- information on the type and amount of the tax in question;
- a brief statement of the claimant's means and submissions;
- where necessary, a copy of any document which may back the payment of
the total amount of the non-objected tax and 50% of the fraction being
challenged.
61

[Page 62]
(3) Silence by the head of the municipal council for a period of
15  (fifteen)  days  from  the  date  of reception  of  the  claim, shall  mean  tacit
rejection and shall open the way for referring the matter to the senior divisional
officer, the representative of the State.
SECTION 139: (1) Where, upon the opinion of the territorially competent State
taxation service, the claimant's arguments are found to be justified, the senior
divisional officer shall recommend to the head of the municipal council to grant
a total or partial relief of the taxes in question.
(2) Silence by the senior divisional officer or refusal by the head
of  the  municipal  council  to  implement  the  recommendations  of  the  senior
divisional officer within 90 (ninety) days following the claim, shall mean tacit
rejection and shall open the way for the matter to be referred to the tax judge, as
a petition against the decision of the head of the council executive.
SECTION 140: (1) The claimant shall have a period of 30 (thirty) days with
effect from the date of rejection of his claim to refer a matter to the tax judge.
(2) Any tax dispute brought before the competent administrative court
shall be governed by the rules and procedure set forth in the manual of tax
procedure for State taxes.
II.
NON - CONTENTIOUS JURISDICTION
SECTION 141: The non-contentious jurisdiction shall hear complaints seeking
to obtain:
- the  remission  or  reduction  of  duly  assessed  council  taxes,  lodged  by
taxpayers facing financial difficulties or destitution who are unable to
settle their debts with the council revenue service;
- the remission or reduction of tax fines or additional tax charges, where
such penalties, interest for late payment are final;
- discharge from tax liability incumbent on certain persons in respect of the
payment of taxes due by third parties.
62

[Page 63]
SECTION 142: The petitions shall be submitted to the head of the council
executive and shall contain the information necessary to identify the tax being
challenged.
SECTION 143: (1) Upon consideration, the head of the council executive shall
notify his remission, reduction or rejection decision in writing within a period of
30 (thirty) days with effect from the date of referral.
(2) Silence on the part of the head the council executive after
the above-mentioned time-limit shall tantamount to tacit rejection.
CHAPTER VI
PENALTIES
SECTION 144: Failure to pay council taxes within the prescribed time-limits
shall lead to the application of the penalties provided by this law for each tax.
PART IX
MISCELLANEOUS, TRANSITIONAL AND FINAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 145: (1) In order to have a clear knowledge of the tax base and in
collaboration  with  the  councils  of  the  area,  Government  services  and
organizations of the sector as well as Tax Authority shall conduct, on the basis
of a map, legal and physical surveys on plots, buildings, occupants and activities
connected thereto.
(2) These operations also known as "land surveys" shall be organized
following conditions laid down by regulations.
(3) During land surveys, the Tax Authority may demand the production of
the originals and take away copies of land titles, building permits, business
licences or discharge tax, as well as property conveyance and enjoyment deeds
on buildings liable to the various taxes and le vies on land, immovable property
and activities.
(4) After the land surveys, a tax Geographic Information System (GIS)
and a taxpayers card index shared between State taxation services and councils
shall be put in place.
63

[Page 64]
(5) A tax census shall be organized within the 3 (three) months preceding
the  beginning  of  each  financial  year  with  a  view  to  updating  the  above-
mentioned taxpayers card index.
(6) Land survey operations shall be organized every 5 (five) years.
(7) The officers in charge of the above-mentioned land surveys and of the
findings of the land surveys shall be bound by the obligations of reserve and
confidentiality.
SECTION 146: (1) Each land survey shall give rise to the updating of a plan
and the annotation of a survey form jointly signed by the surveyors and by the
owner or his representative.
(2) Mention shall be made of his refusal to sign.
(3) The land survey shall give rise to a local tax notice and whose
originating facts have been established.
SECTION 147: The proceeds of taxes from equalization shall continue to be
pooled at FEICOM  pending the setting up of any other public structure as
provided for by law.
SECTION  148:  This  law,  which  repeals  all  previous  provisions  repugnant
thereto, shall be transposed into the General Tax Code upon its enactment.
SECTION  149:  This  law  shall  be  registered,  published  according  to  the
procedure of urgency and inserted in the Official Gazette in English and French.
        Yaounde, 15 December 2009
    (signed) PAUL BIYA
PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC
64

[Page 65]
65