CAMEROON PENAL
CODE
ELVIS AJEH
2/4/2013
BOOK  1
CRIMINAL   LAW
PART ONE
APPLICATION OF CRIMINAL LAW
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Section 1—No Exception
All persons shall be subject to the criminal law
Section 2—General and Special Application
(1) This code and every provision of criminal
law shall be subject to the rules of
international law and to all treaties duly
promulgated and published.
(2) The first book of this code shall govern all
other criminal law unless special provision has
been made, even before the entry into force of
this book, concerning particularly the exclusion
of suspension and the exclusion or limitation of
mitigation circumstances by a law or by
regulation possessing force of law. This
subsection shall apply actively from the first of
October 1966 inclusive.
(3) Any other general provision shall be
subject to any special provision on the same
matter, save otherwise provided.
CHAPTER II
APPLICATION IN TIME
Section 3—No Retrospection
No criminal law shall apply to acts or
omissions committed before its coming into
force or in respect of which judgement has not
been delivered before its repeal or expiry.
Section 4—Less Severe Law
(1) A new provision of criminal law shall, if
less sever e, apply to any offence in
respect of which judgement has not been
delivered before its coming into force.
(2) Where the new provision is more severe,
the old law shall continue to apply to offences
committed before its coming into force.
Section 5—New Preventive Measure
A new law authorising a preventive measure
shall apply to any case where judgement has
not become final before its coming into force.
Section 6 —Abolition of Offences, Penalty or
Measure
Any penalty or preventive measure shall
cease to be enforceable:
(a) From the moment when the act or
omission in respect of which it was imposed is
no longer an offence;
(b) On the abolition of the penalty or measure
generally.
CHAPTER III
APPLICATION IN SPACE
Section 7—Offences within the Territory
(1) The criminal law of the Republic shall
apply to any act done or omitted within its
territory.
(2) The territory of the Republic shall include
its territorial waters and the air space above
the said territory and waters, and all vessels
and aircraft registered in the Republic;
Provided that no member of the crew of a
foreign vessel or aircraft may be tried for an
offence committed against another member of
the same crew on board that vessel or aircraft,
though within the territorial waters or air space
of the Republic, unless the assistance of the
local authorities shall have been invoked or
public order shall have been disturbed.
Section 8—Offence Partly or Wholly Abroad
The criminal law of the Republic shall apply:
(a) To any offence of which any ingredients
has taken place within its territory;
(b) To any offence against the security of the
state or of the counterfeiting of the great Seal
or the current money of the state wherever
committed:
Provided that no foreigner may be tried for an
offence to which the law of the Republic
applies solely by virtue of this sub section
unless he has been arrested within the
territory of the Republic or has been extradited
to it.
Official Journal of the Republic of Cameroon
PENAL CODE
No. 67/LF/1
Section 9 —Abetment, Conspiracy and
Attempt
The criminal law of the Republic shall apply:
(a) To any act or omission within its territory
constituting abetment, conspiracy or attempt
with a view to an offence without the territory;
Provided that said offence is also punishable by
the law of the place of commission;
(b) T o any such act or omission without its
territory with a view to an offence within that
territory.
Section 10 —Offence Abroad by Citizen or
Resident
(1) The criminal law of the Republic shall
apply to any act or omission abroad by a citizen
or resident which is punishable by the law of
the place of commis sion and is defined as a
felony or as a misdemeanour by the law of the
Republic;
Provided that the sentence passed may not be
more severe than that provided by the foreign
law.
(2) No citizen or resident may be tried for
misdemeanour against a private party to which
the law of the Republic applies solely by virtue
of this section except at the instance of the
authority controlling  prosecution after private
complaint or after official request to the
Government of the Republic  by the
Government of the of the place of commission.
Section 11—International Offences
The criminal law of the Republic shall apply
to piracy, traffic in person, the slave trade and
traffic in narcotics committed within or without
the territory of the Republic;
Provided that n o foreigner may be tried for
such an offence committed abroad unless he
has been arrested in the Republic and has not
been extradited, and except at the instance of
the authority controlling prosecution.
Section 12—General Jurisdiction
Subject to exce ptions contained in this
chapter, the courts of the Republic shall have
jurisdiction to try any offence to which its
criminal law is applicable.
CHAPTER FOUR
FOREIGN CRIMINAL LAW AND
JUDGEMENTS
Section 13—Exclusion of Foreign Law
Subject to sections 9 and 10 of this code and
to this chapter, no foreign criminal law shall
have any effect in the courts of the Republic.
Section 14—Foreign Judgements
No foreign criminal judgement against any
person shall have effect within the territory of
the Republic unless:
(a)The act or omission in question is defined
by the law of the Republic as a felony or
misdemeanour under the ordinary law; and
(b) T he regularity of the judgement, its
finality and its conformity with the public policy
of the Republic shall have been ascertained
either by the court trying the person in
question or by the Court of Appeal of his
residence at the instance of the authority
controlling prosecution.
Section 15—Effect of Foreign Judgement
Such judgement shall:
(a) Be taken into consideration as a previous
conviction for the purpose of aggravation of
sentence, of preventive confinement, of
suspension of sentence or revocation of such
suspension, of revocation of release on licence,
of rehabilitation, and of amnesty; and
(b) Found a good plea in the courts of the
Republic of autrefois convict or acquit:
Provided that in the case of conviction the
accused shall have served his sentence or
satisfied it by prescription or pardon.
Section 16—Execution of Foreign Judgement
(1) Any such judgement as is contemplated
by section 14 and is ascertained to conform to
that section, if passed against a citizen or
against a resident, and not enforced
elsewhere, shall be capable of enforcement
within the t erritory of the republic, unless
enforcement shall have been barred by release
on licence, pardon, amnesty or prescription.
(2) Enforcement shall require the order of
the court contemplated by section 14, which
may also, in a fit case, impose the preve ntive
measures attracted according to the law of the
Republic by the offence in question.
PART TWO
PUNISHMENT AND PREVENTION
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Section 17 —Penalties and Offences to be
Prescribed
No penalty or measure shall be imposed unless
provided by law, and except in respect of an
offence lawfully defined.
Section 18—Principal Penalties
The following shall be principal penalties;
- Death
- Imprisonment
- Fines
Section 19—Accessory Penalties
The following shall be accessory penalties:
- Forfeiture
- Publication of the judgement
- Closure of an establishment
- Confiscation
Section 20—Preventive Measures
The following are preventive measures:
- Ban on occupation
- Preventive confinement
- Post-penal supervision and assistance
- Confinement in a special health
institution
- Confiscation.
Section 21—classification of offence
CHAPTER II
PRINCIPAL PENALTIES
A—Death
Section 22—Condition Precedent to Execution
(1) Every sentence of death shall be
submitted to the President of the Republic for
his decision on commutation.
(2) No death sentence may be executed until
the President shall have signified his decision
not to commute.
(3) No woman with child may be executed
until after her delivery
(4) No execution may tak e place on Sunday
or on a public holiday.
Section 23—Execution
(1) Execution of the death sentence shall be
by shooting or by hanging as may be ordered
by the judgement, and shall be public unless
otherwise ordered in the decision not to
commute.
(2) The bodies of persons executed shall be
returned to their families at their request, but
on condition of a quiet funeral.
(3) Nothing may be published by the press
beyond the official record of the execution and
any official communiqué that may be released.
(4) T he detailed application of this section
shall be prescribed by decree.
B—Imprisonment
Section 24—Imprisonment
Imprisonment shall mean loss of liberty
during which the offender shall be obliged to
work, subject to any contrary of the court for
reasons to be recorded in the judgement.
Section 25—Prisoner’s Fund
(1) The proceed from every prisoner’s work
shall be allocated as follow:
2/3 to the treasury;
1/3 to the building up of a reserve fund for the
prisoner.
(2) The condition governing the application
of this section, particularly those with regards
to the management of the fund, shall be
determined by decree.
C—Detention
Section 26
The penalty of detention shall be replaced by
imprisonment wherever such penalty is
provided by the law.
D—Loss of Liberty, Common Provisions
Section 27—Commencement of Sentence
(1) Where the offender has not been in
custody pending trial, and where no warrant of
arrest or remand is issued against him at the
time of judgement in the circumstances
authorised by the Criminal Procedure Code, no
sentence of loss of liberty may be enforced
until it has become final.
(2) No woman who is with child or who has
been recently delivered may begin to serve her
sentence until six weeks after delivery.
(3) A woman with child already in custody
pending trial shall continue until the expiry of
the said period to be in custody as if awaiting
trial.
(4) Where a husband and wife has been
sentenced for the same or different offences to
imprisonment for less than a year, and are not
in custody at the time of sentence, and show
that they have a fixed common residence and a
child under the age of eighteen supported by
them and under their charge, the sentence on
one may be suspend ed until expiry of the
sentence on the other.
Section 28—Calculation of Sentence
(1) In a sentence of loss of liberty expressed
in days, each day shall mean 24 hours
(2) Sentence of one month shall mean thirty
days
(3) Sentence expressed in mo nths or years
shall be reckoned by calendar dates
(4) Subject to section 53, the duration of the
sentence shall include and run from:
(a) The day on which the offender was taken
into custody under that sentence; or
(b) In the case of concurrent sentence
passed on different dates, the day on which he
was first taken into custody under any such
sentence.
(5) In case of escape, the period of unlawful
liberty shall not be counted in the duration of
the sentence.
Section 29—Separation of Minors
An offender under the age of eighteen shall
serve his sentence in a special establishment,
or, failing such establishment, shall be
separated from offenders over that age.
CHAPTER III
ACCESSORY PENALTIES
A—Forfeitures
Section 30—Definition
The forfeitures applicable under this code
shall be the following;
(1) Removal and exclusion from any public
service, employment or office;
(2) Incapacity to be a juror, assessor,
expert referee, or sworn expert;
(3) Incapacity to be guardian, curator,
deputy guardian or committee, save of
the offenders own children, or
member of a family council
(4) Prohibition on wearing any decoration;
(5) Prohibition on serving in the armed
forces;
(6) Prohibition on keeping a school, on
teaching in any educational
establishment, and in general on
holding any post connected with the
education or care of children.
Section 31—Where Applicable
(1) A life sentence shall carry with it for life
the forfeitures prescribed by the last preceding
section.
(2) Any other sentence for felony shall carry
with it the same forfeitures for the duration of
the sentence and for the ten years following its
expiry or released on licence unrevoked.
(3) The court may in any case covered by the
last preceding subsection, for reasons to be
recorded in the judgement, relieve from one or
more of the said forfeitures, or reduce their
duration to no less than two years.
(4) To a sentence for misdemeanour, and
where so authorised by law the court may, for
reasons to be recorded in the judgement, add,
for not more than five years, one or more of
the forfeitures prescribed by the last preceding
section.
Section 32—Forfeitures in Absence
Where sentence for felony is passed in the
absence of the accused, any forfeiture shall
take effect from the date of the publication of
the notice prescribed by the Criminal
Procedure Code.
B—Other Accessory Penalties
Section 33—Publication of Judgement
(1) Where the court may order publication of
its judgement, it shall be posted in a manner to
be prescribed by decree for up to two months
in the case of felony or misdemeanour or
fifteen days for simple offence.
(2) In such case the court may order
publication of its decision in such newspaper as
it may appoint, on radio or television.
(3) Any such publica tion shall be at the
expense of the offender.
(4) Nothing in this section shall restrict
publication by press, or radio or television or
any fair comment.
Section 34—Closure of Establishment
Where the court may order closure of a
business or indus trial establishment, or of any
other premises devoted to gainful activity,
which was used for the commission of an
offence, such closure shall imply a ban on the
exercise of the same business or industry or
activity in the same premises, whether by the
offender or by any other to whom he may sell,
transfer or let the establishment or premises.
Section 35—Confiscation
(1) On conviction for any felony or
misdemeanour, the court may order
confiscation of any property, moveable or
immoveable, belonging to the offender and
attached, which was used as an instrument of
its commission, or is the proceed of the
offence.
(2) Such confiscation may not be ordered on
conviction for a simple offence unless specially
authorised by law.
CHAPTER IV
PREVENTIVE MEASURES
A—Banned Occupation.
Section 36—Banned Occupation
(1) Upon conviction for a felony or
misdemeanour under the ordinary law, the
court may, for reasons to be recorded in the
judgement, forbid the offender to continue to
follow any occupation found to stand in a
direct relation to the offence, and his
continuation in which will give grave reason to
apprehend a repetition.
(2) Subject to any contrary provision of the
law, the ban may not be for less than a year
nor for more than f ive years after completion
of service of the principal sentence.
(3) On subsequent conviction attracting the
first subsection and section 88 for felony or
misdemeanour of the same kind, the ban shall
be extended for life.
B—Preventive Confinement
Section 37—Definition
(1) Preventive confinement shall mean
confinement for from five to twenty years
under a programme of work and social
reformation, during which the offender shall, in
default of a separate establishment, be
confined separately from convicts serving a
sentence of imprisonment.
(2) The internal working of the
establishment, the programme for its inmates,
the details of their work, and the manner of
their reformation shall be prescribed by
decree.
Section 38—Offenders not Liable
No sentence of preventive confinement may
be passed on a person who will be age less
than thirty-five or more than sixty years at the
expiry of his principal sentence.
Section 39—Where Applicable
(1) Sentence of preventive confinement may
be passe d on any offender subject to section
88 of this code by reason of the following
convictions, including that accompanying the
sentence, within the space of ten years
exclusive of any sentence served and any
preventive measure involving personal
restraint:
(a) Two convictions for felony punished with
imprisonment or with death commuted first in
to imprisonment; or
(b) One such conviction for felony and two
for misdemeanour, each punished with more
than one year of imprisonment; or
(c) Four convic tions for misdemeanour, each
punished with more than one year of
imprisonment.
(2) The said space of ten years shall be
counted back from the date of the latest
relevant offence.
(3) To be counted for the purpose of
preventive confinement a convict ion must
have been final and must have been for an
offence committed after the preceding
conviction to be counted has become final.
(4) Previous conviction s the sentences for
which have been commuted, pardoned or
remitted shall be taken in to account.
(5) Previous conviction s expunged by
rehabilitation or by amnesty shall not be taken
in to account.
(6) Previous convictions for offences
committed by persons under the age of
eighteen shall not be taken in to account.
C—Post Penal Supervision and Assistance
Section 40—Definition and Duration
(1) Every offender sentenced to loss of
liberty for more than a may on conviction,
where the circumstances warrant and for
reasons to be recorded in the judgement , be
subjected by the court for up to five years to
post penal supervision and assistance,
consisting of general obligation, and, in a fit
case, of added special obligations
(2) The offender’s compliance with his
obligation shall be superintended by a
Magistrate nominated in that behalf with t he
assistance of salaried or honorary supervisors;
Provided that where the conviction is for
felony or the offender was sentenced under
section 88 of this Code for misdemeanour, his
compliance shall be superintended by the
police.
(3)The detailed application of this section
shall be prescribed by decree.
Section 41—General Obligation
The obligations to which the offender shall
always be subject shall be:
(1) To establish his residence in a given place
(2) To appear when called by the authority
in charge of supe4rvision and assistance;
(3) To receive visits from the supervisor and
give him all information and papers
useful for the verification of his means of
support;
(4) To inform the supervisor in advance, and
explain the reason to him, of any change
of employment or residence;
(5) To inform the supervisor in advance o f
any absence over fifteen days, and
inform him of his return;
(6) To obtain the previous permission of the
authority in charge before any departure
abroad.
Section 42—Special Obligations
In additio n to the general obligations
prescribed by the last preceding section, the
court may impose upon the offender any one
or more of the following special obligations:
(1) To take up residence in one or more
specified places;
(2) Not to be present without special and
temporary permission in specified
places;
(3) To remain in employment or follow a
course of instruction or vocational
training;
(4) To submit to measures of control or of
treatment, including treatment in
hospital, and in particular with a view
to curing an addict ion to alcohol or
drugs;
(5) To contribute to the family expenses or
to pay regularly any maintenance due
from him;
(6) To compensate any damage caused by
his offence;
(7) Not to drive any class of motto vehicle,
defined in terms of the classification in
force for the purpose of driving licence;
(8) To avoid specified places, such as bars,
race-courses, gaming houses;
(9) Not to wager;
(10) To abstain from undue consumption
of alcohol;
(11)To avoid the company of specified
offenders, in particular his co -
offenders or the accessories t o the
offence;
(12)Not to receive or lodge at his residence
specified persons.
D—Health Institution
Section 43—Insane Persons
(1) Upon acquittal for insanity on a charge of
felony or misdemeanour punishable with two
years imprisonment or more and where the
liberty of the accused shall have been found by
the court to be a public danger, the court shall
order his confinement in a special institution.
(2) Such confinement may be terminated
only by the same court upon evidence by the
competent medical authority that the liberty of
the confined person is no longer a public
danger.
Section 44—Addict or Partially Insane
(1) Where an addict to alcohol or drugs, or a
person suffering from medical sickness is
convicted of a felony or misdemeanour
punishable with two years imprisonment or
more and related to his addiction or mental
condition, and where his liberty shall have
been found to be a public danger, the court
may order his confinement in a special health
institution.
(2) Such confinement shall n ot exceed two
years in the case of an addict to alcohol or
drugs, nor five years in the case of the mentally
sick.
(3) Such confinement may be earlier
terminated by the court upon evidence by the
competent medical authority that the liberty of
the conf ined person is no longer a public
danger.
E—Confiscation
Section 45—Confiscation
The confiscation of anything whose
manufacture, custody, sale or use is unlawful
shall be ordered even if not belonging to the
offender, and even if the prosecution does not
result in conviction.
CHAPTER V
RECOGNISANCE
Section 46—Where Applicable
(1) Any person who by his conduct or by his
utterances shall have exhibited an
unambiguous intention to commit an offence
which may disturb the public peace may be
required by the President of the District Court
to enter into a recognisance wit h or without
solvent sureties in such a sum as may be
therein fixed to refrain from commission of any
offence of the like nature for the duration of
the period therein specified.
(2) The sum shall be fixed having regards to
the resources of the person bound over.
Section 47—Period
Where the person required to enter into a
recognisance is a habitual offender, the period
of the recognisance may extend to three years,
but shall not otherwise exceed one year.
Section 48—Recognisance by Parents
Where a person under the age of eighteen
shall have committed any act defined as an
offence, The President of the District Court
may require his parents, guardian or person
responsible under customary law to enter into
the recognisance described by section 46, to be
forfeited if the said person shall commit any
similar act within the space of one year, unless
the obligor shall prove that he took all
reasonable steps to avoid the minor’s
committing the offence.
Section 49—Non Compliance
(1) Where a person required to enter into a
recognisance does not do so, or fails to find the
sureties required, he may be immediately
taken into custody until he shall have complied
with the order; but such custody may not
exceed the period for which the recognisanc e
was required.
(2) Except under section 48, the obligations
described in section 42 (1) and (2) may be
substituted for custody.
Section 50—Breach of Recognisance
(1) Upon conviction of an offence covered by
the recognisance, the District Court sh all
without prejudice to any penalty incurred for
the offence order forfeiture of the sum therein
fixed.
(2) Payment of the said sum shall be
enforced as against the person bound over in
like manner as if it were a fine and as against
the sureties by any civil process.
CHAPTER VI
CONCURRENT AND CONSECUTIVE
SENTENCES
Section 51—Concurrent Sentences; the Rule
(1) Where a person is convicted on several
charges of felony or misdemeanour tried
jointly, or of simple offences tried with either,
only one sentence may be passed, not
exceeding the maximum prescribed for the
most severely punished offence.
(2) Where any person is convicted on several
such charges tried separ ately, any sentence
later passed may be ordered to run
concurrently with, or in the case of fines, to be
merged in, any earlier sentence; and where it is
not so ordered, the aggregate of the sentences
may not exceed the maximum prescribed for
the most severely punished offence.
(3) In the calculation of such aggregate, an
earlier sentence reduced by remission shall be
counted at its reduced and not at its original
length.
(4) No sentence may be ordered to run
concurrently with, or to be merged in, a
sentence which had already become final
before the act or omission in respect of which
the second sentence is passed.
(5) In respect of simple offences sentences
shall not be concurrent or merged unless the
court shall so order.
(6) Subject to any contrary order of the
court, several sentences other than to principal
penalty shall be consecutive as between
themselves.
Section 52—Consecutive Sentences
(1) Sentence of loss of liberty shall be
enforced in the chronological order in which
the imprisonment warrant were notified to the
offender.
(2) Accessory penalties and confinement
under section 43 of this Code shall run from
the date when the sentence becomes final,
while other preventive measures shall
commence from the expiry or suspens ion of
the principal sentence.
(3) Several consecutive preventive measures
shall be enforced in the following order:
(a) Confinement in a health institution
(b) Preventive confinement
(c) Post-penal supervision and assistance
(4) Where dur ing the currency of any such
measure the offender is sentence to loss of
liberty for another felony or misdemeanour,
the preventive measure shall be suspended
until the new sentence shall have been served
out.
Section 53—Custody Awaiting Trial
(1) Where the offender has been in custody
awaiting trial, the duration of such custody
shall be wholly deducted from the computation
of a sentence of loss of liberty.
(2) Where the offender, after having been in
custody awaiting trial is sentenced to a fine
only, the court may relieve him wholly or in
part of the said fine.
CHAPTER VII
SUSPENSION AND REMISSION OF
SENTENCE
A—Suspended Sentence
Section 54—Application and Effect
(1) Subject to any contrary provision of law,
upon conviction for felony or misdemeanour of
an offender not previously sentenced to
imprisonment, or where after such sentence
his conviction has been expunged, the court
may, for reasons to be recorded in the
judgement, suspend for a period of from three
to five years the enforcement of any sentence
of imprisonment for five years or less, or for
fine not imposed under section 92(2) of this
Code.
(2) Such suspension shall not affect any
accessory penalty or pr eventive measure
resulting from the conviction.
(3) Where within the period so fixed,
calculated from the date when the judgement
becomes final, the offender commits a further
felony or misdemeanour for which he is
sentenced to imprisonment and where s uch
sentence is not suspended on probation, both
sentences shall be served consecutively, that
which has been suspended under this section
being served first.
(4) The expiry of the said period shall
otherwise produce the effects described by
section 69 of this Code.
(5) This section shall not apply as between
successive sentences of detention.
B—Probation
Section 55—Where Applicable
(1) In any case where a sentence of six
months or more of imprisonment may be
suspended, suspension may be combined with
probation.
(2) When combined with probation
suspension may also be granted to an offender
with a previous sentence of imprisonment
suspended without probation or with a
previous sentence of imprisonment for less
than six months not suspended.
(3) The pe riod of probation may not be l ess
than three nor more than five years.
(4) Subject to subsection (1) and (2), section
54 of this Code shall apply to suspension on
probation.
Section 56—Meaning of Probation
(1) Probation shall me an the subjection of
the offender to general, and in a fit case, to
added special obligations of supervision and
assistance.
(2) The offender’s compliance with his
obligations shall be superintended by a
Magistrate nominated in that behalf, with the
assistance of salaried or honorary probation
officers.
(3) The probation officer shall be chosen, and
may be replaced by the Magistrate in charge.
(4) The Magistrate in charge at the
offender’s residence may at any time for
reasons to be recorded in writing suspend all
or any of the special obligations or vary them,
but not so as to make them more burdensome.
Section 57—General Obligations
An offender on probation shall always be
subject to the general obligations described by
section 41 of this Code, save that for the
supervisor shall be substituted by the
probation officer.
Section 58—Special Obligations
In addition to the general obligations
prescribed by the last preceding section, the
judgement may subject the offender to one or
more of the special obligations described by
section 42.
Section 59—Duties of Probation Officer
(1) The probation officer shall be bound to
satisfy himself that the offender observes the
general and special obligations of his
probation, and in addition to stimul ate and
encourage the offender’s efforts in the
direction of reform, in particular his family and
occupational re-adaptation.
(2) He shall be bound to afford the offender
all moral support in his power, and it shall be
his duty, where the offender is i n need of
financial support, to apply to the magistrate in
charge to approach any social assistance
organisation with a view to a grant.
(3) He shall report regularly to the said
magistrate on the progress of his task, and
shall refer to him in case of difficulty.
Section 60—Breach of Obligation
(1) Where during the period of probation the
offender shall have broken any general or
special obligation, the court which suspended
the sentence may order its enforcement.
(2) Such order shall not carr y with it
revocation of any previous suspension without
probation.
(3) The expiry of the period without any such
order, and without any further conviction
carrying with it revocation under section 54 of
this Code, shall produce the effects described
by section 69.
C—Release on Licence
Section 61—Definition
(1) Release on licence shall mean the
premature release of a person sentenced to
loss of liberty, whether as a penalty or as
preventive measure.
(2) Both grant and revocation of such licence
shall be by decree.
(3) The general condition and detailed
procedure for grant and revocation of licence
shall be prescribed by decree.
(4) Release on licence not revoked shall
become definite on expiry of the term of the
sentence.
Section 62—Suspension of Measures
(1) The decree granting release on licence
also suspends enforcement of any order of
confinement in a special health establishment,
or of preventive confinement, or of post -penal
supervision and assistance, or of banned
occupation which will follow on release from
the principal penalty.
(2) Such suspension shall become definitive
five years after the expiry of the principal
penalty.
Section 63—Time of Grant
(1) Release on licence from a principal
penalty may not be granted before service of
half the sentence or of the aggregate of
consecutive sentences, regard being had to
remissions if any.
(2) In the case of an offender sentenced
under section 88 of this Code, release may not
be granted before service of two -third of the
sentence or sentences.
(3) Release on licence from preventive
detention may not be granted before service of
five years of the sentence.
Section 64—Revocation
(1) Release on licence may be revoked on
conviction for felony or misdemeanour later
committed or for breach of any of the general
or special conditions of the licence.
(2) In case of revocation, the period of liberty
shall not be counted in the duration of the
sentence.
D—Suspension of Post Penal Measures
Section 65—Suspension of Post-Measures
(1) On the proposal of the authority
contemplated by section 40(2), the court which
had ordered post -penal measures may at any
time, for reasons to be recorded in the order,
suspend all or any of the special obligations
imposed, or vary them, but not so as to make
them burdensome.
(2) Such suspension ma y at any time in like
manner be revoked.
(3) The duration of such suspension, whether
or not revoked, shall be counted in the
duration of the measures.
E—Pardon – Prescription – Death.
Section 66—Pardon
Pardon shall mean the commutation or
remission, in whole or in part and with or
without conditions, of a penalty or preventive
measure or of the obligations of a probative
order.
Section 67—Prescription
(1) Where a principal penalty has remained
unenforced for the following periods after
judgment has become final, neither it nor any
accessory penalty or preventive measure
accompanying it may any longer be enforced.
a) for felony: twenty years;
b) for misdemeanour and simple
offence tried with misdemeanou r:
five years;
c) for other simple offences: two years
(2) The running of time shall be suspended
while enforcement of the sentence is
prevented by any consideration of law or of
fact apart from the offender’s will.
(3) Time shall be gin to run again o n
enforcement to any extent before completion
of the period.
(4) No person convicted in his absence may
appear to set aside the judgement after time
has run in his favour.
Section 68—Death
The offender’s death shall not prevent
enforcement of pecu niary sentence against his
estate of closure of an establishment.
CHAPTER VIII
EXPUNGEMENT OF THE CONVICTION
A – Rehabilitation
Section 69—Definition and Effect
(1) Rehabilitation, whether by laps of time or
by judicial order, shall expunge a conviction for
felony or misdemeanour, and put an end to
any accessory penalty or preventive measure,
save only confinement in a health institution
and closure of an establishment.
(2) Where the same person has been the
subject of more than o ne conviction not yet
expunged, he may not be rehabilitated from
each singly, but only from all together.
(3) There may be no rehabilitation without
discharge of all expenses due to the Treasury
and of any civil judgement giving in the
criminal proceedings.
(4) Rehabilitation shall not affect the right of
the Treasury to any sums already collected in
satisfaction of civil judgement, expenses, fines
or confiscation.
(5) It shall of itself neither restore any
decoration nor restore to any order forfeited.
(6) It shall not of itself restore to any public
service, employment or office, and shall give
no right to restoration to the pos ition in a
public service which, but for the conviction,
would have been attained.
(7) It shall be no bar to a n application for
revision with a view to establish innocence in
fact.
Section 70—Laps of Time
(1) An offender who has not suffered any
further sentence of imprisonment or detention
for felony or misdemeanour shall be without
more rehabilitated by th e expiry of the
following periods:
-- Sentence of fine: five years;
--Single sentence of imprisonment or detention
for up to six months: ten years;
-- Single sentence for up to two years: fifteen
years;
-- Single sentence of up to five years: twenty
years.
(2) For more than one sentence the period
shall be fifteen years for an aggregate of one
year or less and twenty years for an aggregate
of over one year but not more than two years.
(3) Sentences ordered to run concurrently
shall be counted as a single sentence.
(4) The said periods shall run, in the case of a
sentence of fine, from the date of payment or
of prescription, and, in the case of loss of
liberty, from the date of expiry of the sentence,
regard being had to any remission, or of
prescription.
Section 71—Rehabilitation by Court
(1) An offender may apply to the court for
rehabilitation from a conviction for felony after
five years or from a conviction for
misdemeanour after three years.
(2) The said period shall run from the dat e of
release from loss of liberty, and of payment in
the case of fine.
(3) For an offender sentenced under section
88 of this Code, or who has avoided
enforcement of his sentence by prescription,
the periods prescribed by this section shall be
doubled, and in the case of prescription shall
run from the date of prescription.
Section 72—After Death
(1) Within one year of an offender’s death,
his spouse, ascendant or descendant may
revive or present an application for his
rehabilitation, provided that the other
conditions shall have been complied with.
(2) An application already presented may be
continued by the authority controlling
prosecution.
B—Amnesty
Section 73—Effects of Amnesty
(1) Without prejudice to any civil right an
amnesty shall expunge a conviction and shall
put an end to the enforcement of all penalties
pronounced in consequence of the conviction,
save confinement in a health institution and
closure of an establishment.
(2) Unless otherwise expressed, an amnesty
shall bar t he commencement or continuation
of any prosecution.
(3) Unless so expressed, an amnesty shall not
relieve of the liability for any expense due to
the Treasury in respect of a conviction which
has become final.
(4) Unless so expressed, it shall not affect the
right of the Treasury to any sums already
collected in satisfaction of expenses, fine or
confiscation.
(5) Unless so expressed, it shall of itself
neither restore to any decoration nor restore
to any order forfeited.
(6) Unless so expres sed, it shall not of itself
restore to any public service, employment or
office, and shall give no right to restoration to
the position in public service which, but for the
conviction, would have been attained.
(7) It shall be no bar to an application for
revision with a view to establish innocence in
fact.
PART THREE
CRIMINAL RESPONSIBILITY
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
Section 74—Punishment and Responsibility
(1) No penalty may be imposed except on a
person criminally responsible.
(2) C riminal responsibility shall lie on him
who intentionally commits each of the
ingredient acts or omission of an offence with
the intention of causing the result which
completes it.
(3) Except as otherwise provided by law, no
criminal responsibility sha ll arise from the
result, though intended, of an omission.
(4) Except as otherwise provided by law,
there shall be no criminal responsibility unless
subsection 2 of this section has been satisfied:
Provided that responsibility for a simple
offence shall not require any intention to act or
omit or to cause the result.
Section 75—Ignorance of Law and Motive
Neither ignorance of the law nor motive shall
be material in criminal responsibility.
Section 76—Execution of the Law
No act or omission in execution of the law or
authorised by law, and performed in
accordance with the conditions prescribed by
law, shall constitute an offence.
CHAPTER II
IRRESPONSIBILITY AND DIMINISHED
RESPONSIBILITY
Section 77—Accident and Physical Compulsion
No criminal responsibility shall arise from
accident or from irresistible physical
compulsion.
Section 78—Insanity
(1) No criminal responsibility shall arise from
the act or omission of a person suffering from
mental illness which deprives him of all will -
power or of the knowledge that what he does
is blameworthy.
(2) Mental illness whose consequences are
only partial shall diminish responsibility.
Section 79—Intoxication
Involuntary intoxication shall h ave the same
effect as mental illness.
Section 80—Infancy
(1) No criminal responsibility shall arise from
the act or omission of a person age less than
ten years.
(2) An offence committed by a person aged
not more than ten years and not less than
fourteen years may attract only such special
measures as may by law be provided.
(3) For an offence committed by a person
aged over fourteen and under eighteen years,
responsibility shall be diminished.
(4) A person aged eighteen years or over
shall be responsible as an adult.
(5) The age relevant to this section shall be
that attained at the date of commission.
Section 81—Threats
(1) No criminal responsibility shall arise from
submission to threats, not otherwise avoidable,
of immediate death or of grievous harm as
defined by this Code:
Provided that where the act committed is
defined as an offence punishable with death or
has resulted in death or in grievous harm, the
responsibility of the person committing the act
shall be merely diminished.
(2) This section shall not apply to a person
who has voluntarily exposed himself to the risk
of such threats.
Section 82—Respect
Responsibility shall be diminished for an
offence committed:
(a) by a person aged less than eighteen
under the compulsion of his parents or
of the person having charge of him, or
responsible for him under customary
law;
(b) by an employee or subordinate under
the compulsion of his employer or
superior.
Section 83—Obedience to Lawful Authority
(1) No criminal; responsibility shall arise from
an act performed on the orders of a competent
authority to whom obedience is lawfully due.
(2) This section shall not apply where the
order is manifestly unlawful.
Section 84—Lawful Defence
(1) No criminal responsibility shall arise from
an act dictated by the immediate necessity of
defence of the person acting or of any other
person, or any right of himself or of any other,
against an unlawful infringement:
Provided that the means of defence is
proportionate to the seriousness of the
infringement threatened.
(2) Intentional killing shall be proportionate
to an attack causing a reasonable
apprehension of death, of grievous harm as
defined by this Code, of rape or sodomy.
Section 85—Provocation
(1) Responsibility shall b e diminished for an
offence immediately provoked by the unlawful
act of another against the offender or, in his
presence, against his spouse, descendant or
ascendant, brother or sister, master or servant,
or a minor or incapable in his charge:
Provided that the reaction be proportionate to
the provocation.
(2) Intentional killing or wo unding shall be
proportionate to a provocation by violent
blows or injuries.
(3) Intentional killing or wounding of a
spouse or of his or her lover shall be
proportionate to the provocation of finding
them in the act of adultery.
(4) In order to diminish responsibility
provocation must be of a kind to deprive an
ordinary person of self control.
Section 86—State of Necessity
No criminal responsibility shall arise from an
attempt on the right of property (....  .)
Section 87—Effect of Diminished
Responsibility
(1) Wherever responsibility is by law
diminished, the pen alty provided for the
offence shall be reduced as follows:
(a) The penalty of death or loss of liberty for
life shall be reduced to loss of liberty for from
two to ten years;
(b) Any other penalty for felony shall be
reduced to loss of liberty for from one to five
years;
(c) The maximum penalty for misdemeanour,
whether of loss of liberty or of fine, shall be
reduced by half, and the minimum to that
provided by section 92(1) of this Code.
(2) Where responsibility is reduced for more
than one reason or where there are in addition
mitigating circumstances, the minimum shall
be that provided by section 92(1).
CHAPTER III
AGGRAVATION OF RESPONSIBILITY
Section 88—Previous Conviction
(1)(a) Whether a new offence defined as a
felony or misdemeanour is committed within a
period of time running from the date of the
final conviction and expiring within five years
of release from or prescription against a
sentence of felony or misdemeanour, the
maximum penalty provided, if of limited
duration shall be doubled.
(b) Wherever a new simple offence is
committed within a period of time running
from the date of the final conviction and expiry
within twelve months of release from or
prescription against a sentence for a simple
offence – the maximum penalty provided, if of
limited duration, shall be doubled.
(2) This section shall apply as between
successive sentences of detention.
Section 89—Public Servant
(1) Subject to any special penalties provided
for felonies or misdemeanours comm itted by
public servants, the fact of being a public
servant established or otherwise shall
aggravate the responsibility of any such person
guilty of any other felony or misdemeanour
against which it is his duty to guard or to take
action.
(2) The pena lty in such a case shall be
increased as under the last preceding section.
CHAPTER IV
MITIGATION AND SELECTION OF
SENTENCE
Section 90—Mitigation
The benefit of mitigating circumstances may
be given, for reasons to be recorded in the
judgement, save where they are by law
expressly excluded.
Section 91—Mitigation in case of Felony
(1) Upon finding of mitigating circumstances
in favour of any person convicted of felony, the
sentence may be reduced for no less than ten
years’ loss of liberty if the offence is punishable
with death, to not less than five if it be
punishable with loss of liberty for life, and not
less than one year in any other case.
(2) Where the penalty is reduced under the
last preceding subsection to ten years or less
the court may add a fine of up to two million
francs.
Section 92—Mitigation in Other Cases
(1) Upon finding of mitigating circumstances
after conviction of misdemeanour or of a
simple offence, the court may reduce to five
days any sentence of loss of liberty, and any
sentence of fine to one franc, and may pass
sentence of one such penalty only.
(2) Where the offence is by law punishable
with loss of l iberty only, the court may
substitute a fine of up to one million for
misdemeanour or up to twenty -five thousands
francs for a simple offence.
Section 93—Selection of Sentence.
Sentence of penalty or measure shall vary,
within such limits as may be pr escribed or
authorised by law, according to the
circumstances of the offender and to the
likelihood of his reformation, and to the
practical means of carrying out.
CHAPTER V
ATTEMPT AND CONSPIRACY
Section 94—Attempt
(1) An attempt to commit a felony or
misdemeanour shall mean the performance of
any act towards its commission unambiguously
indicating an irrevocable intention to commit
it, and shall be treated, where execution has
been arrested or has failed solely by reason of
circumstances i ndependent of the offender’s
will, as the commission of the felony or
misdemeanour attempted.
(2) An attempt shall be punishable
notwithstanding that complete execution was
impossible by reason of a circumstance of fact
unknown to the offender.
(3) Mere preparation shall not constitute an
offence.
Section 95—Conspiracy
(1) Conspiracy shall mean the resolve
concerted and determined between two or
more persons to commit an offence.
(2) There can be no conspiracy between
husband and wife.
(3) Conspiracy to commit a felony or
misdemeanour shall be treated, where
execution has failed solely by reason of
circumstances independent of the
conspirator’s joint will, as the commission of
the felony or misdemeanour resolved.
(4) The respo nsibility of a conspirator
voluntarily withdrawing from the conspiracy
before execution has commenced shall be
diminished.
(5) No penalty may be imposed on a
conspirator who prevents the execution of the
offence resolved or who before any attempt at
execution informs the administrative or judicial
authorities of the conspiracy.
CHAPTER VI
PARTICIPATION
Section 96—Co-offenders
A co -offender shall mean a person who, in
agreement with another, takes part with him in
the commission of an offence.
Section 97—Accessories
(1) An accessory shall mean a person who
abets the commission of a felony or
misdemeanour, that is:
(a)Who orders or in any manner causes the
commission of an act or omission so defined;
or
(b) Who aids or facilita tes the preparation or
the commission of such an offence
(2) Attempted abetment shall be treated as
abetment.
Section 98 —Punishment of Co -offenders and
Accessories
(1) Subject to any special provision of law, a
co-offender and accessory shall be punishable
in like manner as a sole or principal offender.
(2) Circumstances resulting in the
irresponsibility of any person, or in his
exemption from punishment or reduction or
increase of his punishment, shall, where
personal, affect only the person concerned.
(3) Circumstances other than personal shall
affect any co -offender or accessory who could
have foreseen them.
Section 99—Foreseeable Consequences
(1) Any co -offender or accessory to the
commission or attempted commission of a
felony or misdemeanour shall also be
responsible in respect of any other offence
committed or attempted as a foreseeable
consequence of the agreement or abetment.
(2) Any person habitually furnishing places of
refuge or assembly to malefactors of whose
felonious conduct he is aware shall also be
liable to punishment as their accessory.
Section 100—Accessory After the Fact
(1) An accessory after the fact shall mean a
person who after the commission of a felony or
misdemeanour shelters an offender or his
accessories from arrest or from investigation,
or who has custody of or disposes of anything
taken, misappropriated or otherwise obtained
by means of the offence.
(2) This section shall not apply as between
husband and wife.
(3) An accessory after the f act shall be
punished under special provision of law.
PART IV
STATE LAWS
Section 101—Breach of State Laws or Orders
(1) Where any law of either the Federated
state expressly so provide, any breach of such
law which is not defined or punishable und er
this Code or any other federated law shall be
punished with imprisonment for up to one year
or with fine of from twenty -five thousands to
five hundred francs or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
(2) Breach of any order lawfully issued under
such law shall constitute a simple offence.
PART ONE
FELONIES AND MISDEMEANOURS
AGAINST THE STATE
CHAPTER I
THE SECURITY OF THE STATE
A—External Security
Section 102 —Hostilities Against the
Fatherland
Any citizen:
(a) Taking part in hostilities against the
Republic; or
(b) Assisting or offering to assist the said
hostilities – shall be guilty of treason and
punished with death.
Section 103 —Other Felonies Punishable with
Death
Whoever—
(a) instigate a foreign power to undertake
hostilities against the Republic; or
(b) surrenders or offers to surrender to a
foreign power or to its agents any troops,
territory, installations or equipment
employed in the defence of the nation,
or any defence secret, or who in
whatever manner acquires such a secret
with intent to surrender it to a foreign
power; or
(c) with intent to injure the defence of the
nation, damages any construction
installation or equipment, or commits
any malpractice liable to prevent their
normal working or lead to an accident,
 shall, if a citizen, be guilty of treason
and, if a foreigner, be guilty of
espionage, and shall in either case be
punished with death.
Section 104—Penalties of Ordinary Law
On reduction of the penalty provided by
section 102 and 103, any loss of liberty shall be
imprisonment.
Section 105 —Prejudice Punishable with Ten
Years
Whoever in time of peace –
(1) Otherwise than to surrender to a foreign
power, acquires a defence secret, or reveals
such a secret to a person not entitled to know
it; or
(2) With intent to surrender them to a
foreign power collects information, articles,
documents or processes where advantage
could be taken of such collection to injure the
defence of the nation; or
(3) Intrudes by any deceitful means into any
installation, ship, aircraft or vehicle employed
in the defence of the nation; or
(4) Carries out any drawing, survey, or
photographic or topographical operation
within any defence installation or within any
prohibited area around it as laid down by the
defence authorities and without their
permission; or
(5) Loiters within a fixed distance prohibited
by competent authority around a defence
installation; or
(6) Flies without authorisation in a foreign
aircraft over the territory of the Republic; or
(7) Sets up secretly a means of
correspondence or of long distance
transmission liable to injure the defence of the
nation; or
(8) By any activity not approved by the
Government expose the Republic to reprisal –
Shall be punished with imprisonme nt for
from one to ten years or with fine of from one
hundred thousands to ten million francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
“(9) (Law no 70-LF-9 of the 20th May 1970) –
Enlist or undertake training, without prior
permission of the competen t Cameroon
authorities, in the armed forces or police forces
of a foreign country and engages in activities
injurious to the defence of the nation or in
activities capable of eventually exposing the
Republic to a rebellion or an insurrection.”
Section 106 —Prejudices Punishable with Five
Years
BOOK  TWO
PARTICULAR  CRIMES
Whoever in time of peace—
(1) Carries on with the agents of a foreign
power a course of communication liable to
injure the defence or diplomatic position of the
Republic; or
(2) Within the territory of the Republic and
without the permission of the Government
recruits or enlist any person for any foreign
armed forces; or
(3) By any activity not approved by the
Government exposes citizens to reprisals; or
(4) Witho ut permission from the
Government surrenders or communicates to a
foreign power or its agents any invention
connected with the defence of the nation, or
any information, study or process regarding
such an invention, or any industrial application
connected with the defence of the nation; or
(5) By rashness, carelessness or breach of
any regulation, permits the removal or
observation, whether in whole or in part, and
for however short a time, of any article,
equipment, document or information
entrusted to him or in his care, and knowledge
of which is liable to lead to the discovery of a
defence secret; or
(6) By rashness, carelessness or breach of
any regulation permits the damage or
destruction of any object, equipment, or
document entrusted to him or in his care,
where such damage or destruction is
prejudicial to the defence of the nation; or
(7) Being in control of any supplies , concern
or undertaking on behalf of the armed forces,
or being agent for any supplier or a
subcontractor, causes the se rvice to fail or to
be delayed be it merely by carelessness; or
(8) Being in control of any supplies, concern
or undertaking on behalf of the armed forces
commits a fraud in respect of the description,
the quality or the amount of works, of labour
or of articles supplied –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from one to five years or with fine of from fifty
thousands to five million francs or with both
such imprisonment and fine.
“(9) (Law no. 70-LF-9 of 20th May 1970) Enlist
or undertakes training without prior
permission of the competent Cameroon
authorities in the armed forces or police forces
of a foreign country”.
Section 107—Failure to Report
Any citizen who in time of peace fails to
inform the defence, administrative or legal
authorities, so soon as he comes to know it, of
any activity liable to injure the defence of the
nation, shall be punished as under the last
forgoing section.
Section 108—War Time
(1) Any citizen or resident who in time of war
and without permission from the proper
authority—
(a) Carries on any correspondence or relation
with the subjects or agents of the enemy; or
(b) Concludes directly or indirectly, any
business transactions with a subject or agent of
the enemy, or with any person residing in hi s
territory –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from ten to twenty years
(2) Whoever in time of war—
(a)Joins in any undertaking to spread alarm
and despondency in the defence forces or in
the nation, with intent thereby to injure the
defence of the nation; or
(b) Commits any offence described by
sections 105, 106 or 107 –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from ten to twenty years.
(3) Whoever in time of war commits any act
of any kind liable to injure the defence of the
nation, shall, if no higher penalty be provided,
be punished with imprisonment for from one
to five years, or with fine of from fifty
thousands to five millions francs, or with both
such imprisonment and fine.
“(4)(Law No. 70-LF-9 of the 20th of May 1970)
For the purposes of subsection 2 and 3 of this
section, any state of emergency, mobilisation
or siege shall be treated as time of war”.
Section 109 – ‘Defence Secret’
For the purposes of this Code a defence
secret shall mean any information of wha tever
kind liable to assist hostile undertakings against
the Republic and not already made public.
Section 110 – Extension to Foreign Powers
The provisions of the forgoing section may
be extended by decree so as to apply in like
manner to acts committ ed against foreign
powers.
B – Internal Security
Section 111 ( New) (Law No. 91 -007 of  30 th
July 1991) – Secession
(1) Whoever undertakes in what ever
manner to infringe the territorial integrity of
the Republic shall be punished with
imprisonment for life.
(2) In time of war, or in time of state of
emergency or siege, the penalty shall be death.
Section 112 – Civil War
Whoever provokes civil war by arming the
people, or by inciting them to take arms
against each other, shall be punished wi th
death.
Section 113 – (new) (Law No. 90 -61 of 19 -12-
90) – Propagation of False Information.
Whoever sends out or propagates false
information liable to injure public authorities
or national unity shall be punished with
imprisonment for from three mo nths to three
years and with fine of from 100,000 to
2,000,000 francs.
On reduction of the penalty provided by
section 111(2) and 112, any loss of liberty shall
be imprisonment.
Section 114 – Revolution
Whoever by force attempts to alter the laws
comprising the Constitution, or to overturn the
political authorities set up by the said laws or
to render them incapable of exercising their
powers shall be punished with imprisonment
for life.
Section 115 – Armed Band
(1) Whoever, with intent to commit a felony
defined by sections 111, 112 or 114, or to
hinder the operation of the forces of order
against those committing any such felony,
forms an armed band, or holds any office or
command in it, or joins in such bands’
commission of, or attempt to commit such
felony shall be punished with imprisonment for
life.
(2) Any other member of such a band shall
be punished with imprisonment for from ten to
twenty years.
(3) For the purpose of this section, an armed
band shall mean any gathering of five or more
persons of whom anyone bears any arm open
or concealed.
(4) The provision of section 95(5) of this
Code shall apply to this section.
Section 116 – Insurrection
Whoever during an insurrection –
(a) Instigate or encourage by whatever
means the gathering of insurgents; or
(b) Hinders by whatever means the
summoning, the assembly or the operation of
the forces of order, or usurps their command;
or
(c) Invades or destroy any public or private
building; or
(d) Holds or seizes any w eapon, ammunition
or explosives; or
(e) Wears any official uniform, garb or
emblem, whether civil or military –
Shall be punished with imprisonment from
ten to twenty years.
Section 117 – “Weapons”
For the purpose of the forgoing section, a
weapon shall include both an arm properly so
called and any other article carried with intent
thereby to inflict bodily harm or material
damage.
C – Accessory Penalties
Section 118 – Specific Confiscation
On conviction for any felony or
misdemeanour defined in this chapter, the
confiscation prescribed by section 35 of this
Code shall be ordered and may also be
extended to property not belonging to the
offender.
Section 119 – Confiscation of Unlawful
Property
(1) Upon conviction for any felony or
misdemeanour defined by this chapter, the
court may order confiscation of the offender’s
property, of what ever nature and whether or
not held jointly, to which he can show no
lawful title.
(2) In time of war such conf iscation shall
always be ordered.
Section 120 – General Confiscation
Upon conviction for felony defined by this
chapter, the court may in addition order the
confiscation of all or part of the offender’s
property lawfully acquired.
Section 121 – Forfeiture
(1) Upon conviction for a felony defined by
this chapter the duration of the confiscation
described in section 30 may not be reduced
below five years.
(2) Upon conviction for a misdemeanour and
sentence under this chapter to loss of libe rty
the court may order such forfeiture for not less
than five nor more than ten years.
(3) The duration of the post -penal measures
described in section 40 may be extended to ten
years.
(4) Where the offender, in case either of
felony or misdemeanour, is an officer or official
of the public service or a member of the armed
forces, the disqualification from service may be
for life.
CHAPTER II
THE CONSTITUTION
A—Electoral Offences
Section 122 (new) (Law No. 91 -007 of 30 -7-
1991) – Electoral Fraud
(1) Whoever in a federal, federated or local
election:
(a) causes his name to be entered into a
register of electors under a false identity and,
on causing himself to be registered conceals a
disqualification provided for by this law or
claims the entry of his name on two or more
registers;
(b) Cause his name to be improperly entered
on a register of electors by means of fraudulent
statements or false certificates, or by similar
device wrongly enters on or strikes off a
register of electors the name of any citizen;
(c) Having been deprived of the right to vote
participates in the election;
(d) Records a vote either by virtue of being
fraudulently registered or by impersonating a
registered elector;
(e) By reason of the fact that his n ame
appears on more than one register of electors
votes more than once;
(f) Being responsible at the pools for the
receiving, counting or verifying of the
envelopes containing the ballot papers
withdraws, adds to or alter any ballot paper or
reads a na me other than the name actually
appearing thereon;
(g) By spreading false news, false rumours or
by other fraudulent devices reduce the number
of votes or misappropriates same and
influence an elector or electors to refrain from
voting;
(h) In any of the commissions provided in
this law, either in a poling station or in a
Government office before, during or after
election, by disregards of the laws and
regulations or by any other fraudulent device,
violates the secrecy of the ballot, affects the
genuineness of the election, obstructs the
counting of votes or alters the result thereof;
(i) Is guilty of fraud in the issue or production
of a certificate showing that the name of a
person is entered on or has been stroke off the
register of electors;
(j) On the day of election either as principal
offender or accomplice, whether or not with
force, fraudulently removes or takes away a
ballot box –
Shall be liable to the penalties laid down
under section 122 of the Penal Code.
(2) Whoever by w ilful disregards of law or
regulation causes unintentionally the like result
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one month to one year, or with fine of from
five thousands to fifty thousands francs or with
both such imprisonment and fine.
(3) Where the offender or his accomplice is a
public servant within the meaning of section
131 of the Penal Code, he shall be liable to the
penalties laid down under section 141 of the
Penal Code.
(4) Prosecution shall be barred by the laps of
four months from commission of the offence
or from the last step in preparing prosecution.
Section 123 – Corruption and Violence
(1) Whoever –
(a) By unlawful assembly, riots or
threatening demonstration, disrupts electoral
activities or interfer es with the ex ercise of the
right to vote or with the freedom of voting;
(b) On the day of election, is guilty of
contempt or assault on the local poling
commission or on any member thereof, or by
interference or by threat of any kind, delays or
prevents the conduct of the polling operations;
(c) Directly or by any other person on his
behalf, makes any gift, donation, promise or
grant of employment, whether in public or
private sector, or other individual benefits in
order to influence the vote of an elector or
electors and has obtained the vote of such
elector or electors;
(d) Directly or by any other person on his
behalf, solicits or accepts from the candidate
any gift, donation favour or benefit s referred
to in sub-section (c) hereinabove;
(e) By inter ference, force or threat upon or
against an elector, influences his vote by
threatening to make such elector loss hiss
employment or by threatening damage to his
person, family or property,--
Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from three months to two years, or with fine of
from ten thousand to one hundred thousand
francs, or with both such imprisonment and
fine.
(2) Where the vote influenced is that of an
electoral college or constituency or of any
section thereof, the detention shall not be l ess
than six months and the fine not less than
twenty thousand francs.
B – Concert
Section 124 – Against the Law, the Operation
of Public Service, or the Security of the State.
(1) Any person in whom is vested any part of
the public authority, and an y public servant,
who with any other such person concert or
determines:
(a) Any measure contrary to law or to any
regulation lawfully issued thereunder; or
(b) Any measure, including collective
resignation, designed primarily to obstruct or
to interrupt the carrying on of a public service
– shall be punished with detention for from six
months to three years.
(2) Where the concert is between the civil
and military authorities, the punishment shall
be detention for from one to two years.
(3) Where the object of the concert
described in the last preceding subsection is a
felony against the security of the state, the
punishment shall be death.
C – Trespass
Section 125 – On Legislature
Any public servant who:
(a) Assumes the exercise of legislative
power; or
(b) Refuses to enforce any provision of law –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
six months to five years.
Section 126 – By Executive and Judiciary
Reciprocally.
Whoever:
(a) Being the representative of the exec utive
authority, issues any other or prohibition to
any Court; or
(b) Being a legal or judicial officer, issues any
order or prohibition to any executive or
administrative authority, --
Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from six months to five years.
Section 127 – By Judiciary On Particular
Immunities
Any judicial, legal or investigating police
officer who contrary to any law conferring
immunity prosecute, arrest or tries a member
of the federal or a federated Government, or of
the feder al or federated Assembly, -- Shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one to
five years.
C – Misuse of Public Force
Section 128 – Unlawful Use of Force
Whoever requires or orders the intervention
or the use of public force against the
enforcement of any provision of the law or
regulation, or against a lawful order, whether
judicial or administrative, shall be punished
with imprisonment for from three to ten years,
or with fine of from twenty thousand to two
hundred thousand francs.
Section 129 – Non Compliance with
Requisition
Any commander of the public force who
does not comply with a lawful requisition for
its use by the civil authorities shall be punished
with imprisonment for from six months to two
years.
E – Accessory Penalties
Section 130—Forfeitures
On conviction for any misdemeanour under
this chapter the court may impose for from five
to ten years the forfeitures described by
section 30 of this Code.
CHAPTER III
OFFENCES BY PUBLIC SERVANTS AS SUCH
A – Preliminary
Section 131 (Law No. 77 -23 of 6th Dec. 1977) –
Definition of Public Servant
For the purpose of any criminal law, a public
servant shall include any judicial or legal
officer, any law official, any employee or
official of the State or of any other body
corporate governed by public law , or of a
corporation or semi -public corporation, of a
law official, any armed forces or gendarmerie
serviceman, any employee of the national
security or prison administration, and any
person charged, whether continuously or
occasionally with any public duty, mission or
task, while acting in the discharge of his office
or in relation to the said office.
Section 132—Aggravation for Public Servants
(1) Any public servant who uses force to any
person shall be punished, whe re no heavier
punishment is provided, with imprisonment for
from six months to five years.
(2) The punishment provided by section 189
(copying government papers); 206 (licenses
etc.); 207 (official certificates); 291(1) (false
arrest); 292 (forced labo ur); 299(invasion of
residence); 300(tampering with
correspondence);310(professional confidence);
315(forged certificate); shall be doubled where
the offender is a public servant.
Section 132; (a) (new) (Law No. 97 -009 of 30th
Jan. 1997) – Torture
(1) Where torture results in the
unintentional death of the victim, it shall be
punished with life imprisonment.
(2) Where, as a result of torture, the victim is
permanently deprived of the use of the whole
or any part of a limb, organ or sense, th e
punishment shall be imprisonment for from
ten to twenty years.
(3) Where torture results in illness or
industrial disablement of more than 30 days,
the punishment shall be imprisonment for
from five to ten years and a fine of from
100,000 to 1,000,000 francs.
(4) Where torture results in illness or
industrial disablement of up to 30 days, or in
mental or moral pain and suffering, the
punishment shall be imprisonment for from
two to five years and a fine of from 50,000 to
200,000 francs.
(5) “Torture” shall within the context of this
Code mean any act by which severe pain or
suffering, whether physical or mental, is
intentionally inflicted by or at the instigation of
a public official or with his express or tacit
consent on a person for such pur poses as
obtaining from him or a third person
information or confession, punishing him for an
act he  or a third person has committed or is
suspected of having committed, or intimidating
or putting pressure on him or a third person, or
for any other motive based on any form of
discrimination whatsoever.
Torture shall not include pain or suffering
arising from, inherent in, or incidental to lawful
sanctions.
(6) Exceptional circumstances such as a state
of war, internal political instability or any o ther
public emergency may not be invoked as
justification of torture.
(7) The orders of a superior or public
authority may not be invoked as justification of
torture.
(8) The conditions provided for under section
10(1) of this Code shall not apply to torture.
Section 133 (Law No. 77-23 of 6th Dec. 1977) –
Forfeitures, Confiscation and Publicity
(1) Upon conviction for any offence defined
in this chapter, or sentence under section 89 of
this Code, the court may impose on the public
servant found guilty the forfeitures described
by section 30 of this Code.
Provided that the court shall be bound to
impose the forfeiture listed in section 30 in the
cases covered by section 134,134(a), 135, 136
and 161 if this Code.
(2) Where sentence is passed for any offence
referred to in section 134, 134(a), 135, 136 and
161 of this Code, the court shall be bound to
order the confiscation provided for in section
35 and that its decision be made known by
print media, by radio or by television.
B – Illegal Advantage
Section 134 (Law No. 77 -23 of 6 Dec. 1977) –
Corruption
(1) Any public servant or government
employee who, for himself or for a third party
solicits, accepts or receives any offer, promise,
gift or present in order to perform, refrain from
performing or postpone any act of his office
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
five to ten years and with fine of from two
hundred thousand to two million francs.
(2) The term of imprisonment shall be for
from one to five years and the fine from one
hundred thousand to one million francs where
the act does not lie within the competence of
the person corrupted but was however
facilitated by his office.
(3) Any public servant or government
employee who solicits or accepts any reward in
money or find for himself or for a third party as
remuneration for having already performed or
refrained from any such act shall be puni shed
in like manner as under the forgoing
subsection (2).
Section 134(a) (Law No. 77-23 of 6th Dec.) –
(1) Whoever make s promises, offers, gifts
and presents or yields to request liable to
result in corruption in order to obtain either
the performance, postponement or abstention
from an act one of the favours or benefits
defined in the forgoing section shall be
punished in like manner as under the forgoing
section 134(1) whether the corruption
produced its effect or not.
(2) Whoever makes gifts and presents and
yields to requ est for the remuneration of an
act which has or has not been performed shall
be punished in like manner as under the
forgoing section 134(2).
Section 135 (Law No. 77-23 of 6th Dec.1977) –
Interest in Grant
(1) Any public servant or government
employee who takes or accepts any interest,
direct or indirect:
(a) In any grant, contract or select ion of
tenders subject to his opinion or which he
supervised, controlled, administered or drew
up;
(b) In any private concern, cooperative, semi-
public corporation or corporation in which the
state has shares, in any authority or occasion
subject to his supervision or control;
(c) In contract or agreement signed on behalf
of the state or a local authority with a natural
person or body corporate;
(d) In any business in which it is his duty
authorise payment or liquidation –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from one to five years and a fine of from two
hundred thousand to two million francs.
(2) The provision of this section shall be
applicable to former public servants as defined
by section 131 of this Code who, within five
years fr om cessation of duties as a result of
resignation, dismissal, leave, placement on
reserve or retirement, or for any other reason,
shall take any kind of interest in any grant,
operation or concern mentioned above and
previously subject to their supervision , control
and administration or for whose payment or
liquidation they where responsible.
Section 136 – Interest in Concern
(1) Any public servant whose duties include
the supervision of any concern, undertaking or
concession, or the expression of an o pinion on
its operations, and who in any manner assists
or shares in its financing or operation, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from six
months to two years and with fine of from
twenty thousand to two million francs.
(2) The like assistance or sharing, except by
way of shares inherited, within five years from
the cessation of such duties shall be punished
in like manner.
C – Against the Public Interest
Section 137 – Indulgence
Any public servant who grants ex emption
from any fee, due, duty, tax or contribution, or
who delivers at a lesser price than that
prescribed, any produce of a government
department, of a coope rative, or of any
authority or corporation either public or
subject to the administrative control of the
state, or in which the state holds directly or
indirectly the majority of the shares shall be
punished with imprisonment for from two to
ten years and with fine of from twenty
thousand to two million francs.
Section 138 – Failure to Report Deficiency
Any public servant having knowledge of any
cash or book deficiency in the accounts of a
public official under his orders or supervision,
and not reporting the deficiency to the legal
authorities or to his immediate superior, shall
be punishe d with imprisonment for from one
to five years,
Section 139 – Negligent Custody
Any custodian who by negligence permits –
(1) Destruction, defacement or abstraction of
any property described by section 187 of this
Code shall be punished with impri sonment for
from one month to one year and with fine of
from ten thousand to fifty thousand francs;
(2) Abstraction, removal or destruction
within the meaning of section 188 – Shall be
punished with imprisonment for from three
months to one year and with fine of from ten
thousand to fifty thousand francs;
(3) Breach of seals as described by section
191 – Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from six days to six months;
(4) Escape or rescue within the meaning of
section 193 – Shall be punished with
imprisonment for from two months to two
years.
D – Against Private Interest
Section 140 – Oppression
(1) Any public servant who takes advantage
of his position to infringe any private right or
interest shall be punished with imprisonment
for from three months to one year, or with fine
of from five thousand to fifty thousand francs,
or with both such imprisonment and fine.
(2) Where the offence is committed with
intent to procure for the offender or for
another any gain of any kind, the
imprisonment shall be for from three months
to three years, and the fine of from fifty
thousand to one million francs.
Section 141 – Against Civic Rights
Any public servant who obstructs the
exercise by a citizen of his electoral rights, or
his exercise or enjoyment of the rights
mentioned in section 30 (1),(2),(4) or (5) of this
Code, shall be punished with imprisonment for
from one to five years.
Section 142 – Undue Demand
Any public servant, notary, auctioneer, bailiff
or process -server or representa tive of any
such, who demands any fee, due, duty or tax
which is not due, or material benefit otherwise
than on payment of the proper price, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from two to
ten years and with fine of from twenty
thousand to two million francs.
Section 143 –Favour
(1) Any public servant who decides between
parties from favour or ill-will, shall be punished
with imprisonment for from one year to five
year.
(2) Where the public servant is a judicial or
legal officer or federal inspector or senior
divisional officer, the penalty shall be doubled.
Section 144 –Forgery of Official Act
Any public servant, notary, auctioneer, bailiff
or process -server who falsely makes or alters,
whether in its substance or in the dates,
signatures of parties or witnesses, any deed
entry or other writing which it is his duty to
draw up, record, certif y or serve, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from ten to
twenty years.
E – Culpable Abstention
Section 145 – Failure to Suppress Riot
Any public servant having the power, the
duty and the means so to do, refrains from
dispersing a riot within the meaning of section
232 of this Code, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from three months to two
years.
Section 146 – Failure to Protect Private Rights
Any public servant who having the power,
the duty and the means so to do refrains from
preventing the use of force against any person,
or his deprivation of liberty or any obstruction
to the exercise of his civic rights within the
meaning of section 141 of this Code, shall be
punished as an accessory.
Section 147 – Denial of Justice
Any person exercising judicial functions who
declines, after having been duly moved in that
behalf, to issue a decision, shall be punished
with imprisonment for from three months to
two years.
Section 148 –Refusal of Service
Any public servant, notary auct ioneer, bailiff
or process -server who, after having been
lawfully required, refrain from performance of
any duty of his office, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from three months to two
years.
Section 149 – Neglect of Preliminaries to
Marriage
(1) Any registrar of birth, marriage and death
who registers a marriage celebrated by
himself:
(a) Without checking that all consent
required for its validity have been given; or
(b) Before the expiry of such time as may be
prescribed in case the w ife has already been
married, shall be punished with imprisonment
for from three months to one year and with
fine of from five thousand to seventy thousand
francs.
(2) The consequences of the irregularity in
civil law shall be immaterial to the applica bility
to this section.
Section 150 – Birth, Marriage and Death
Registers
Any registrar of birth, marriage and death
who makes any entry elsewhere than in the
registers prescribed in that behalf, or who fails
to enter any such birth, marriage or death ,
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one to three months and with fine of from two
thousands to forty thousand francs.
Section 151 – Persistent Neglect
(1) Any public servant whose persistent
obstruction or neglect is the cause of
procrastination, delay or confusion, or who
persistently refrains from performing any duty
of his office, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from one to three months
and with fine of from two thousand to twenty -
five thousand francs.
(2) No prosecu tion may be commenced
without the complaint of the relevant Minister
or Secretary of state.
CHAPTER IV
PUBLIC AUTHORITY
A – Contempt and Assault
Section 152 – “Contempt”
(1) A contempt shall mean any defamation,
abuse or threat conveyed by gesture, word or
cry uttered in any place open to the public, or
by any procedure intended to reach the public.
(2) The exceptions defined by section 306
shall be applicable to contempt.
(3) Prosecution shall be barred by the laps of
four months from commission of the offence
or from the last step in preparation or
prosecution.
Section 153 – Contempt of President and
Other Dignitaries
(1) Whoever commits a contempt of the
President of the Republic or of the Vice
President of the Republic, of any person
exercising the whole or a part of prerogative,
or of any foreign Head of State, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one to
five years, or with fine of from twenty
thousand to twenty million francs, or with both
such imprisonment and fine.
(2) Whoever commits a contempt of any
Head of Government, or of any foreign
minister of a foreign G overnment, or of a
diplomatic representative accredited to the
Government of the Republic shall be punished
with imprisonment for from six months to two
years, or with fine of from twenty thousand to
twenty million francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
(3) The truth of the defamatory matter may
never be proved.
Section 154 (new) (Law No. 90 -61 of 19 Dec.
1990) – Contempt of Public Bodies and Public
Servants
(1) Whoever commits a contempt:
(a) Of any court, of the armed forces, or of
any public body or public administration, or
(b) In relation to his office or position, of a ny
member of the Government or of the National
Assembly, or of any public servant, shall be
punished, unless, in the case of defamation , be
proved the truth of the defamatory matter,
with imprisonment for from three months to
three years, or with fine of f rom one hundred
thousand to two million francs, or with both
such imprisonment and fine.
(2) Whoever whether in speech or in writing
intended for the public, incites to revolt against
the Government or institutions of the Republic
shall be punished wit h the penalties provided
in subsection (1) above.
Section 155 – Where not Public
Where any defamation, abuse or threat has
been committed otherwise than publicly
against any person defined by either of the last
two forgoing sections, the punishment,
whether of loss of liberty or of fine shall be
halved.
Section 156 – Assault on Public Servant
(1) Whoever uses force to a public servant or
otherwise interferes with him, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one
month to three years and with fine of from five
thousand to one hundred thousand francs.
(2) Where the force or interference is
premeditated, or where it results intentionally
or otherwise, in harm within the meaning of
section 277 or 280 of this Code, the
punishment shall be imprisonment for from
five to ten years, and fine of from twenty
thousand to five hundred thousand francs.
(3) The court may in any case impose the
forfeitures described by section 30 of this
Code.
(4) Where the force or interference results
unintentionally in death, the punishment shall
be imprisonment for life.
(5) If the force or interference is intended to
cause death, the punishment shall be death.
B – Resistance
Section 157 (new) (Law No. 90 -61 of 12 Dec.
1990) – Resistance
(1) Whoever:
(a) By any means whatever incites to the
obstruction o f the execution of any law ,
regulation, or lawful order of the public
authority,
(b) By force or other interference obstructs
the performance of lawful duty by any person
engaged in the execution of any law,
regulation, decision in the administration o f
justice or other lawful order, shall be punished
with imprisonment for from three months to
four years.
(2) In the case provided by subsection (1) (b)
above, the punishment shall be for from one to
five years if the offender or any co -offender is
armed.
Section 158 – Collective Resistance
(1) Where the offence described in the last
forgoing section is committed by five or more
persons together the punishment shall be
imprisonment for from one to three years, and
where any two of them openly bear arms, the
imprisonment shall be for from five to fifteen
years.
(2) Any co -offender who himself bear arms,
open or concealed, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from five to fifteen years.
Section 159 (Repealed) (Law No. 91 -007 of
30th July 1991) -- Political Resistance.
The penalty of detention shall be replaced by
imprisonment wherever such penalty is
provided by the law.
C—Influence and Fraud
Section 160 – Compulsion of Public Servant
Whoever by interference or threat procures
a publi c servant improperly to perform or to
refrain from any act of his office, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from two to
ten years and with fine of from twenty
thousand to one million francs.
Section 161 (Law No. 77-23 of 6th Dec. 1977)—
Procuring Influence
(1) Whoever by assault or threat or by gift or
promise corrupts a person having any
influence, real or supposed, with interest to
procure any advantage from any public
authority, shall be punished in like manner as
under section 160.
(2) Any public servant who for himself or a
third party solicits, receives or accepts any
offer, promise or gift to procure any advantage
from any public authority or body placed under
the control of the public authority , any
contract, operation or other benef it arising
from agreement concluded with public
authority or a body placed under the control of
the public authority and in this way taking
undue advantage of the real or supposed
influence that his status or office has conferred
upon him, shall be punishe d in like manner as
under section 160 of this Code.
Section 162 – Misleading Public Servant
(1) Whoever by any false statement
influences the conduct of a public servant shall
be punished with imprisonment for from
fifteen days to three months and wit h fine of
from five thousand to fifty thousand francs.
(2) Where the statement is a report relating
to the registration of any birth, marriage or
death, the imprisonment shall be for from
three months to three years.
(3) Where the statement is made on oath the
imprisonment shall be from one to five years
(4) Whoever by any means procures the
entry in the criminal record of any one person
of the conviction of any other shall be punished
with imprisonment for from one to five years.
(5) Whoeve r by any means procures the
improper issue to himself of an extract from
the criminal record of another person shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one
month to one year.
Section 163 – Fraud at Examinations
Whoever commits any fraud at an
examination or competition with intent
thereby to procure his entry into any public
service, or any degree certificate or
qualification issued by the state or by a public
service, whether national or foreign, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one
month to three years, or with fine of from
twenty five thousand to two million, or with
both such imprisonment and fine.
D – Perversion of Justice
Section 164 – Perjury
(1) Whoever in any proceeding gives on oath
or affirmation false evidence capable o f
influencing the decision, shall be punished ,
where he may no longer alter it:
(a) Where the proceeding terminates in an
order of discharge, with imprisonment for from
three months to one year and with fine of from
five thousand francs,
(b) Where the proceeding is a criminal trial
and the charge is:
-- Of simple offence, with imprisonment for
from six months to three years and with fine of
from five thousand to one hundred thousand
francs
-- Of misdemeanour, with imprisonment for
from one to five y ears and with fine of from
ten thousand to five hundred thousand francs
-- Of felony with imprisonment for from five to
ten years and with fine of from fifty thousand
to two million francs
-- Of felony punishable with death, with
imprisonment for life
(c) In the case of any other proceeding with
imprisonment for from one to five years and
with fine of from ten thousand to five hundred
thousand francs.
(2) Where the false witness has received any
gift or accepted any promise, any penalty of
limited duration and any fine shall be doubled,
and any such gift shall be confiscated.
(3) Any interpreter who in any proceeding
distorts the meaning of any word or writing
which he is bound to translate shall be
punished in like manner as if he had committed
perjury.
Section 165 – False Expert Report
Any expert referee making a false report
which he may no longer alter shall be punished
as provided by section 164(2).
Section 166 – False Oath
Any party to judicial proceedings other than
criminal who swears falsely to any point the
truth of which has been committed to his oath,
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one to five years and with fine of from ten
thousand to five hundred thousand francs.
Section 167 – Concealment of Proceeding
Any party to judicial proceedings who keeps
his opponent, by any false pretence within the
meaning of section 318(1)(c), in ignorance of
any step against him shall be punished with
imprisonment for from three months to two
years or with fine of from twenty thousand to
one million francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
Section 168 – Concealment and Falsification of
Evidence
(1) Whoever with intent to influence any
judicial proceedings –
(a) Destroys or conceals any physical
evidence or obstructs the attendance of a
witness; or
(b) Fabricates or uses false physical evidence
or mislead a witness –
Shall be punished in like manner as if he had
committed perjury, according to the distinction
drawn by section 164
(2) Whoever obta ins from any person a
promise not to report a felony or
misdemeanour, or not to give evidence, shall
be punished in like manner:
Provided that this subsection shall not apply to
a promise obtained without the aid of the
means described by section 161 from the
victim of a misdemeanour or his legal
representative.
Section 169 – Prejudicial Comment
(1) Whoever refers publicly to any judicial
proceedings not yet terminated by final
judgement in a manner liable to influence,
whether intentionally or not, th e opinion of
any person for or against any party, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from fifteen
days to three months and with fine of from ten
thousand to one hundred thousand francs.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to an
account in good faith of proceedings in open
court.
(3) Where the offence is committed through
the print media, radio or television, the
imprisonment shall be from three months to
two years and the fine from one hundred
thousand to five million francs.
Section 170 – Forfeitures
Upon conviction under any of the last five
forgoing sections, the court may impose the
forfeitures described by section 30 of this
Code.
E – Refusal to Assist Justice
Section 171 – Non Intervention
Whoever, being able so to do by his own
immediate action and without risk to himself
or to any other person, refrain s from
preventing the commission of a felony or of a
misdemeanour against the bodily integrity of
any person, shall be punished with
imprisonment fo r from one month to three
years or with fine of from twenty thousand to
two million, or with both such imprisonment
and fine.
Section 172 – Refusal to Clear
Whoever, being able so to do without
incriminating himself, his spouse or any
ascendant or des cendant, refrains from
communicating to the judicial or police
authorities evidence of the innocence of any
person in custody awaiting trial for felony or
misdemeanour, or, notwithstanding that the
judgment may not be final, convicted of felony
or misdemea nour, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from one months to three
years or with fine of from twenty thousand to
one million  francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
Section 173 – Defaulting Witness
(1) Any person regularly summoned as a
witness in any proceeding who without just
cause fails to appear or declines to take oath or
to affirm, or to give evidence, shall be punished
with imprisonment for from six days to three
months and with fine of from one thousand to
fifty thousand francs.
(2) Whoever, having publicly referred to a
felony or misdemeanour and publicly
proclaimed his knowledge of the offender or of
his accessories, refuses to answer or evades
the questions on such points of the judicial or
legal officer having jurisdiction , shall be
punished with imprisonment for from six days
to one year or with fine of from twenty
thousand to four hundred thousand francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 174 – Defaulting Expert
Any person whose assistance has been
regularly required as expert, any medical
practitioner or interpreter by any judicial or
legal authority and who without just cause
declines to furnish it shall be punished with
fine of from twenty thousand to five hundred
thousand francs.
Section 175 – Defaulting Juror or Assessor
Any person summoned as juror or assessor
who without just cause fails to appear or to
take oath or to affirm as required by law , or
withdraws before the termination of his duties,
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
six days to three months and with fine of from
five thousand to fifty thousand francs.
Section 176 – False Excuse
Whoever falsely excuses himself under any
of the last three forgoing sections shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one to
three months.
F – Disobedience to Judicial Orders
Section 177 – Banned Resistance
Whoever appears in any place from which he
has been banned, or removes from any place
to which he has been restricted, under section
42 of this Code, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from one month to one year.
Section 178 – Other Penalties and Measures
Whoever –
(a) Follows an occupation which has been
forbidden him under section 36 of this Code; or
(b) Reopens any premises closed under
section 34 of this Code; or
(c) Infringes any forfeitures or obligation not
covered by the last forgoing section which has
been imposed upon him under sections 31, 41,
or 42 – shall be punished with imprisonmen t
for from fifteen days to six months and with
fine of from ten thousand to one hundred
thousand francs.
Section 179 – Custody of Minor
(1) Whoever fails to surrender a minor to the
person to whom his custody has been granted
by order, whether permanent or temporary, of
a court, shall be punished with imprisonment
for from one month to one year and with fine
of from five thousand to one million francs.
(2) Where the offender has been deprived of
parental power, the imprisonment may extend
to three years.
Section 180 – Maintenance
(1) Whoever lets pass two months without
paying in full any maintenance which he has
been ordered by a court to pay to his spouse,
ascendant or descendant, shall be punished
with imprisonment for from one month to one
year or with fine of from twenty thousand to
four hundred thousand francs, or with both
such imprisonment and fine.
(2) Any such default shall be presumed to
have been intentional, nor shall any inability to
pay arising from drunkenness or other habitu al
misconduct be a defence.
Section 181 – Wilful Insolvency
Whoever, after the decision of any court,
final or otherwise, ordering payment of a sum
of money, contrive to be insolvent, shall be
punished imprisonment for from one to five
years.
Section 182 – Re-entry on Immoveable
Property
Whoever within three months of execution
of or submission to an order against him for
possession of any immovable property, retakes
possession from the party to whom it has been
awarded by the court, shall be puni shed with
imprisonment for from fifteen days to six
months.
G – Obstruction of Public Service
Section 183 – Refusal of Tax
(1) Whoever by any means organises a
collective refusal to pay any tax shall be
punished with imprisonment for from three
months to two years and with fine of from two
hundred thousand to two million francs.
(2) Whoever instigates the public to refuse or
to delay the payment of any tax shall be
punished with imprisonment for from six
months to one year and with fine of from fi fty
thousand to one million francs.
Section 184 – Misappropriation of Public
Funds
(1) Whoever by any means takes or keeps
dishonestly any property, movable or
immovable, belonging to, in transition to or
entrusted to the United State, or to any
authority or corporation either public or
subject to the administrative control of the
state, or in which the state holds directly or
indirectly the majority of the shares, shall be
punished:
(a) Where the value of the property is more
than half a million f rancs, with imprisonment
for life; and
(b) Where the said value is half a million
francs or less, but over one hundred thousand
francs, with imprisonment for from fifteen to
twenty years;
(c) Where the said amount is one hundred
thousand francs or less, with imprisonment for
from five to ten years and with fine of from
fifty thousand to five hundred thousand francs.
(2) The forgoing punishment may not be
reduced, whatever the mitigating
circumstances, below ten, five or two years as
the case may be nor may its execution be
suspended.
(3) Where section 87(2) of this Code is
applicable, the punishment may not be
reduced below five years, two years or one
year, a the case may be, and execution may not
be suspended except in the case of diminished
responsibility for infancy.
(4) Confiscation under section 35 of this
Code shall be ordered in every case, and the
forfeitures described in section 30 shall be
imposed for from five to ten years.
(5) Publication of the judgment shall be
ordered.
(6) This section shall not apply to
misappropriation and receiving of military
property covered by the Military Justice Codes.
Section 185 – Disturbance
Whoever disturbs the operation of any
public service to which he does not belong
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
six days to one month or with fine of from one
thousand to fifty thousand francs.
Section 186 – Resistance to Work
Whoever by assault or threat resists the
carrying out of any works lawfully ordered or
authorised by public authority, or who
destroys, conceals or removes any boundary
mark thereto appertaining, shall be punished
with imprisonment for from three months to
two years and with fine of from ten thousand
to fifty thousand francs.
Section 187 – Damage t o Public or Protected
Property
Whoever destroys or defaces any monument
or statue or other property dedicated to public
use or adornment and erected by public
authority or by leave of the said authority, or
any protected immovable or movable object or
natural feature or site, shall be punished
imprisonment for from one month to two
years and with fine of from twenty thousand to
one hundred and twenty thousand francs.
Section 188 – Removal and Destruction of
Public Records
(1) Whoever abstracts, removes or destroys
any document in the custody of any public
authority shall be punished with imprisonment
for from one to five years and with fine of from
ten thousand to two hundred thousand francs.
(2) Whoever destroys or damages any
register, record or other original document of
any public authority, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from five to ten years and
with fine of from twenty -five thousand to two
hundred thousand francs.
Section 189 – Copies of Government Papers
Whoever takes, without authority or
permission, a copy of any document the
property of the Government shall be punished
with imprisonment for from one month to one
year.
Section 190 – Misappropriation of Attached
Property
Whoever misappropriates, d estroys or
damages any attached or garnished property
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one to five years and with fine of from fifty
thousand to one million francs.
Section 191 – Breach of Seals
Whoever beaks any seal lawfully affixed shall
be punished with imprisonment for from six
months to two years and with fine of from fifty
thousand to five hundred thousand francs.
Section 192 – Communication with Persons in
Custody
Whoever contrary to the rules governing the
custody of any person lawfully detained
facilitates his relations with any outside party,
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
fifteen days to six months.
Section 193 – Escape
(1) Whoever escapes from lawful custody, or
who, being permitted to work outside prison
leaves his place of work without permission,
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
three months to one year.
(2) Whoever rescues any person from lawful
custody shall be punished in like manner.
(3) For escape or rescue effected by force to
the person or to property, the punishment
shall be imprisonment for from one t o five
years; and for escape or rescue with arms , the
punishment shall be imprisonment for from
five to ten years.
(4) Where the person in custody is charged
with felony or has been sentenced to loss of
liberty for more than ten years, the
punishment shall be imprisonment for from
five to ten years.
Section 19 4 -- Accessory after the Fact by
Shelter
(1) An accessory after the fact to felony or
misdemeanour by shelter of the offender,
whether convicted or not, shall be punished
with imprisonment for from two months to
two years.
(2) Where the principal offence is punishable
with death, the accessory sh all be punished
with imprisonment for from two to ten years.
(3) No defence absolving from responsibility
a principal not yet acquitted shall be available
to the accessory.
Section 195 -- Subscription to Fine
Whoever publicly invites subscription for the
purpose of indemnifying any person against
any pecuniary sentence passed on him by a
criminal court shall be punished with
imprisonment for from fifteen days to six
months or with fine of from five thousand to
fifty thousand francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
Section 196 – Defacement of Posters
Whoever removes, obliterates or defaces
any notice posted under section 33 of this
Code shall be punished with imprisonment for
from fifteen days to six months or with fine o f
from five thousand to fifty thousand francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 197 – Revenge on Witness
Whoever –
(a) Commits a contempt of a witness by
reason of the evidence which he has given,
unless, in the case of defamation, he proves
the truth of the defamatory matter; or
(b) Causes any loss to a witness by reason of
the evidence he has given, shall be punished
with imprisonment for from ten days to one
year or with fine of from ten thousand to two
hundred thousand franc s, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
Section 198 (new) (Law No. 93 -013 of 22 Dec.
1993) – Forbidden Publication
(1) Whoever publishes –
(a) Any record of any p roceeding of a court
or of the L egal Department in respect of a
felony or misdeme anour before it has been
read out in open court; or
(b) Any account of proceedings in camera or
in juvenile court; or
(c) Any conviction of a minor mentioning any
particular allowing of his identification; or
(d) Any information on the proceeding of a
parliamentary sub committee before their
report has been laid on the table of the House,
except a communiqué issued by the
subcommittee officers; or
(e) Any information on the proceeding of the
federal Judicial Council, except a communiq ué
issued by the Chairman or Vice Chairman of the
Council – shall be punished with fine of from
ten thousand to five hundred thousand francs.
(2) Whoever publishes any deliberation in
chambers by any court shall be punished with
fine of from ten thousa nd to three million
francs.
(3) In case of publication by the print media,
radio or television, the punishment shall be
doubled.
(4) (Law No. 68-LF-14 of 18 th Nov. 1968) –
Whoever in Cameroon or in any court
proceedings:
(a) Makes any sound recording; or
(b) Takes any photographs whatever, by
means of any camera, cinematographic or
television process, or any other similar process,
shall be liable to the penalties laid down in
subsection (2) of this section.
Section 199 – Innkeeper’s Register
Any keeper of an inn or common boarding
house who, contrary to any regulation, does
not register, or registers under a false name,
any person staying in the said inn or boarding
house shall be punished with imprisonment for
from six days to three mon ths and with fine of
from ten thousand to one hundred thousand
francs.
Section 200 – Illicit Burial
Whoever disposes of a human corps
otherwise than as prescribed by law or
regulation shall be punished with
imprisonment for from six days to three
months and with fine of from two thousand to
fifteen thousand francs.
CHAPTER V
AGAINST STATE GUARANTEES
A – Forgery and Counterfeiting
Section 201 – Great Seal
(1) Whoever forges the Great Seal or make
use of such forged Seal shall be punished with
imprisonment for life.
(2) Whoever makes use of the Great Seal
improperly procured shall be punished with
imprisonment for from ten to twenty years.
Section 202 – Treasury Security
Whoever forges or alters any security issued
by the public treasury under its stamp or marks
or makes use of any such forged or altered
security shall be punished with imprisonment
for life.
Section 203 – Signatures, Stamps and Punches
(1) Whoever forges or alters the signature of
the President of the Republic, of the Vice
President, of either Prime Minister or of any
Minister, Deputy Minister or Secretary of State,
or any Government stamp or any punch for
hall-marking gold or silver, shall be punished
with imprisonment for from ten to twenty
years.
(2) Whoever makes use of any such forged
stamp or punch, or of any document or object
bearing such forged or altered signature, stamp
or mark shall be punished in like manner.
(3) Whoever makes use of any such stamp or
punch or of any document or obje ct bearing
such signature, stamp or mark where genuine
but improperly procured, shall be punished in
like manner.
Section 204 – Marks and Stationery
(1) Whoever forges or alters –
(a) Any seal, stamp or mark of a legislative
assembly or of a court or of an administrative
office; or
(b) The printed stationery or forms of any
legislative assembly, court or administrative
office; or
(c) Any punch or mark designed to be placed
in the name of the government on weights or
measures, or on merchandise; or
(d) Any hammer used for punching
government forestry marks; or
(e) Any postage stamp, postmark or reply
coupon issued by the postal administration, or
any revenue stamp or impress stamp – shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one to
five years and with fine of from forty thousand
to four million francs.
(2) Whoever distributes, sells or makes use
of such forged or a ltered seal, stamp, punch,
mark, postmark, paper or coupon, shall be
punished in like manner.
(3) Whoever distri butes, sells or makes use
of such thing where genuine but improperly
obtained, shall be punished in like manner.
Section 205 – Public Act, Document or Record
(1) Whoever forges or alters, whether in its
substance or in its date, signatures or counte r
signatures, any act of the legislature, of the
executive (including a passport) or of the
judiciary, or any document or record drawn up
by a person having exclusive authority so to do,
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
ten to twenty years.
(2) Whoever makes use of any such
document or record so forged or altered shall
be punished with imprisonment for from five
to ten years and with fine of from forty to two
million francs.
Section 206 -- Licences and Similar Documents
Whoever –
(a) Forges or alters an identity card, driving
licence, game licence, elector’s card, family
booklet or military booklet; or
(b) Procures the issue for himself or for
another of any such document under a wrong
name; or
(c) Make use of any such document, whether
forged, altered or issued in a wrong name; or
(d) Makes dishonest use of any genuine
document of such nature belonging to another
– shall be punished with imprisonment for
from three months to three years.
Section 207 – Official Certificates
(1) Whoever forges or alters any official
certificate shall be punished with
imprisonment for from six months to three
years.
(2) Whoever makes use of any such
certificate shall be punished in like manner.
Section 208 – Postage and Revenue Stamps
Whoever makes use of any postage or
revenue stamp already used, or surcharges any
postage or revenue stamp, or makes
unauthorised use of any postal privilege, shall
be punished with imprisonment for from ten
days to one year and with fine of from five
thousand to fifty thousand francs.
Section 209 – Postal Documents
(1) Whoever forges or alters –
(a) Any postal identity card, whether national
or foreign, or any subscription card in respect
of post restante; or
(b) Any label, stamp, post -mark or reply
coupon issued by a foreign postal
administration – shall be punished with
imprisonment for from ten days to six months
and with fine of from five thousand to fifty
thousand francs.
(2) Whoever sells offers for sell or make use
of any such matter shall be punished in like
manner.
Section 210 – Colourable Resemblance
Whoever manufactures, sells, distributes or
makes use of any object or printed matter
bearing to any object or printed matter
described in the last nine forgoing sections a
resemblance liable to facilitate their
acceptance in place of the matter or object
imitated, or to mislead the public, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from ten days
to six months and with fine of from twenty
thousand to two hundred thousand francs.
Section 211 – Counterfeit Note and Coin
(1) Whoever –
(a) Counterfeits or alters any currency note
or any gold or silver coin being legal tender in
the Republic; or
(b) Imports in to the Republic any su ch
counterfeit or altered note or coin; or
(c) Utters any such counterfeit note or coin –
shall be punished with imprisonment for life
(2) In case of any other currency note or
coin, national or foreign, and whether or not
legal tender, the punishm ent shall be
imprisonment for from ten to twenty years.
(3) Where the alteration consist of mere
colouration of coin , whether or not legal
tender in the Republic or abroad, the
punishment shall be imprisonment for from six
months to five years.
(4) Where the coin or note has been received
in ignorance of the fact that it was counterfeit
or altered, and uttered after knowledge of the
same, the punishment shall be imprisonment
for from three months to three years and fine
of three times the face value of the said coin or
note.
Section 212 – Counterfeiting Equipment
Whoever without authorisation
manufactures or posses any instrument,
apparatus, machine or material designed for
the forgery of the Great Seal, any treasury
security, or any punch, stam p or mark , or for
the counterfeiting of note or coin, whether
national or foreign, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from five to ten years and
with fine of from fifty thousand to one million
francs.
Section 213 – Improper Possession
Whoever without authorisation posses any
thing or document described in section 201 to
202 inclusive of this Code shall be punished
with imprisonment for from one to five years.
Section 214 – Accessory Penalties
(1) On conviction for any misdemean our
defined in the forgoing thirteen sections, the
court may impose the forfeitures described in
section 30 of this Code.
(2) On conviction under the said sections,
confiscation under section 35 shall be ordered.
B – Usurpation
Section 215 – Striking Money
Whoever without authority:
(a) Strikes coin of whatever form or
denomination, or prints any note payable to
bearer, or imports or utters such coin or note;
or
(b) Manufactures or posses any machine,
apparatus, instrument or material capab le of
use for the striking or printing of any note or
coin liable to be mistaken for lawful money –
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
five to ten year and with fine of from fifty
thousand to one hundred and fifty thousands
francs.
Section 216 – Usurpation of Office
(1) Whoever assumes any public office,
whether civil or military, to which he is not
appointed, or performs any act belonging to
any such office, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from six months to five years
(2) In the case of a public servant continuing
to act in an office after official notice of his
cessation from the said office, whether
temporary or final, the punishment shall be
imprisonment for from three months to two
years.
(3) On conviction the court may a lso impose
the forfeitures described by section 30 of this
Code.
(4) Where the offender takes advantage of
his usurpation to commit any offence defined
by chapter III of this Part, he shall be punished
as if he held the office usurped.
Section 217 – Solemnisation of Marriage
Any minister of religion who –
(1) Not being authorised to perform a civil
marriage, solemnises a religious ceremony of
marriage without having seen a certificate of
marriage already performed by a registrar of
births, marriages and deaths; or
(2) Being authorised to perform a civil
marriage:
(a) Solemnises only a religious ceremony of
marriage; or
(b) Performs a civil marriage without having
seen a certificate of no impediment from the
said registrar – shall be punished with fine of
from five thousand to thirty thousand francs,
and on subsequent conviction within the
meaning of section 88 of this Code, with
imprisonment for from one to five years.
Section 218 – Usurpation of Uniform or
Decoration
Whoever wea rs in public any uniform or
decoration to which he is not entitled, or which
bears a colourable resemblance to the same,
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
three months to two years or with fine of from
five thousand to five hundred thousand fran cs,
or with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 219 – Usurpation of Qualification
Whoever without being entitled thereto
makes use of a qualification belonging to a
profession legally regulated, or of an official
degree, certificate of education or diploma, or
of a title governed by public regulation, shall be
punished with imprison ment for from three
months to two years or with fine of from one
hundred thousand to two million francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 220 – Title of Honour
Whoever makes public use of any title of
honour to which he is not entitled shall be
punished with fine of from five thousand to
two million francs.
Section 221 – Common Provisions
(1) The three last forgoing sections shall be
equally applicable to any foreign uniform,
decoration, title or qualification.
(2) The said sections shall not apply to the
actors at a public entertainment nor to
children’s games.
(3) On conviction under any one of the said
sections, the court shall order the marginal
annotation of the said judgment on any
notarial deed or register of birth s, marriages
and deaths in which the titled has been
assumed, and may also order publication of its
judgement.
C – Guarantees to the National Economy
Section 222 – Credit of the State
(1) Whoever by any means, with intent to
injure the credit of the state:
(a) Spread publicly any false or misleading
rumour liable to undermine confidence in the
stability of the currency or in the value of any
public funds or of the funds of any cooperative,
or of any authority of corporation either public
or subject to the administrative control of the
state, or in which the state holds, directly or
indirectly, the majority of the shares; or
(b) Encourages the public to withdraw funds
from any public deposit or from any
establishment compelled by law to pay in t o a
public deposit, or to sell any Government loan
or other treasury paper, or discourages the
public from purchase of or subscription to the
same, shall be punished with imprisonment for
from three months to two years and with fine
of from two hundred tho usand to two million
francs.
(2) On conviction under this section the court
shall order publication of its judgement.
Section 223 – Legal Tender
Whoever refuses any note or coin being legal
tender in the Republic and to the extend that it
is legal tender, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from ten days to three
months or with fine of from one thousand to
one hundred thousand, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
Section 224 – National Development
Whoever with intent to injure the nat ional
development transfers abroad any specialised
staff or delivers abroad any industrial or
commercial secret , shall be punished with
imprisonment for from six months to two years
and with fine of from one hundred thousand to
five million francs.
Section 225 – Loans and Subsidies
Whoever puts to any use other than that for
which it was granted a loan or subsidy from the
federal or federated state, from a cooperative,
or from an authority or corporation described
by section 184, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from one to ten years and
with fine of from ten thousand to one million
francs.
Section 226 – Standards Regulations
Whoever infringes any regulation prescribing
standards for any produce to be exported, shall
be punished with fine of from fifty thousand to
four million francs, and with confiscation of the
goods in question.
PART TWO
FELONIES AND MISDEMEANOURS
AGAINST THE GENERAL INTEREST
CHAPTER I
PUBLIC SAFETY
Section 227 – Arson and Destruction
(1) Whoever sets fire, directly or indirectly,
and notwithstanding that he is the owner:
(a) To any placed used or another man’s
dwelling; or
(b) To any land sea or air vehicle in which are
one or more persons; or
(c) To any working mine or its appurtenances
– Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from three to ten years and with fine of from
five thousand to one million francs.
(2) Destruction of such property shall be
punished in like manner as arson.
Section 228 – Dangerous Activities
(1) Whoever fails properly to provide against
risk of bodily harm to any person from his
dangerous activities shall be punished with
imprisonment for from six days to six months.
(2) Whoever rashly and in a manner liable to
cause harm to any person:
(a) makes use of fire, or of any inflammable
or explosive matter, or of electricity, or of any
machinery; or
(b) Demolishes in whole or in part any
construction or any uninhabited building,
notwithstanding that he may be the owner; or
(c) Furnishes medical or surgical treatment,
or furnishes or administers any drug or other
substance; or
(d) Leads, drives, rides, stops or leaves any
animal or vehicle on the public highway –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from three months to three years or with fine
of from five thousand to five hundred
thousand francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
(3) Whoever drives any vehicle when drunk
or under the influence of dr ugs, shall be
punished in like manner.
(4) Upon conviction under subsection (2) (d)
in respect of a vehicle, or under subsection (3),
the court may add disqualification from holding
a driving licence for up to two years.
Section 229 – Explosive Substance
Whoever infringes any regulation governing
the manufacture, storage, transport, import or
export of, or trade in explosive substances,
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one month to one year or with fine of from two
thousand to one hundr ed thousand francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 230 – Public Highway
(1) Whoever without lawful permission
obstructs the use of any public highway or
waterway, or renders passage less convenient,
whether by damaging the surface of the
highway or diverting the course of the
waterway, or by erection, or by excessive use,
or by use of his adjacent land, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one
month to two years.
(2) Whoever being bound to repair any
highway or any work co nnected with it,
refrains from so doing, shall be punished in like
manner.
CHAPTER II
PUBLIC PEACE
Section 231 – Unlawful Assembly
Whoever –
(a) Takes part in the arrangement for a
meeting, demonstration or procession in any
place open to the public without having giving
such notice as may be required by law, or
before the expiry of such notice, or after
service of lawful prohibition; or
(b) Before the giving of such notice or after
service of such prohibition, issues by whatever
means any invitation to attend such assembly;
or
(c) Gives notice liable to mislead the
authorities in respect of the character or
purpose of the proposed assembly, --
Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from fifteen days to six months and with fine of
from five thousand to one hundred thousand
francs.
Section 232 – Riot
(1) A riot shall mean an assembly on the
public highway of five or more persons in
manner liable to disturb the public peace.
(2) Whoever takes part in a riot and does no t
withdraws on the first call of the proper
authority, shall be punished with imprisonment
for from fifteen days to six months.
(3) The penalty shall be doubled for any
person who continues in the riot until it be
dispersed by force.
Section 233 – Armed Riot
(1) Whoever takes part in a riot which is
armed within the meaning of sections 155(3)
and 117 of this Code, and himself bears any
weapon or does not withdraws on the first call
of the proper authority, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from three months to two
years.
(2) The punishment shall be imprisonment
for from two to five years for any person who
continues in the riot until it be dispersed by
force.
(3) The punishment shall be imprisonment
for from five to ten years for a ny person who
takes part in the riot at the moment when any
such weapon is used.
(4) All punishment under this section shall be
doubled where the riot takes place at night.
(5) On conviction under this section, the
court may add the forfeitures des cribed by
section 30 of this Code.
Section 234 –Where Political
Wherever the offence defined by the last
three forgoing sections is of a political nature,
the punishment shall be detention in place of
imprisonment.
Section 235 – Seditious Cries
Whoever in any place open to the public
utters any seditious cry or song shall be
punished with imprisonment for from eight
days to one month or with fine of from two
thousand to fifty thousand francs, or with both
such imprisonment and fine.
Section 236 – Depredation by Band
(1) Whoever as a member of an assembly or
band, and by open force, plunders or damages
any movable or immovable property, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from ten to
twenty years.
(2) For such felony committed in a stat e of
emergency or siege, the punishment shall be
imprisonment for life.
(3) For such felony committed in time of war,
the penalty shall be death.
Section 237 – Possession and Carriage of Arms
(1) Whoever without such permission as may
be required by law manufactures, exports,
imports, keeps, transfers or sells any firearm or
ammunition shall be punished with
imprisonment for from three months to one
year or with fine of from fifty thousand to
three hundred thousand francs, or with both
such imprisonment and fine.
(2) The punishment shall be doubled for
carriage of any such arms outside the
offender’s residence.
(3) Whoever delivers any such arms or
ammunition to any person without
ascertaining that he is licence to keep it shall
be punished as his accessory.
(4) Confiscation under section 35 of this
Code shall be ordered in every case; and on
subsequent conviction within the meaning of
section 88 the court may impose the
forfeitures descr ibed by section 30 and order
the closure of the establishment to whatever
other use it may be put.
Section 238 – Dangerous Carriage of Arms
Whoever whether licensed or not to bear
arms shall bear any weapon within the
meaning of section 117 of this Co de in a place
open to the public in a manner liable to disturb
the public peace or to alarm any person, shall
be punished with imprisonment for from three
months to two years or with fine of from fifty
thousand to three hundred thousand francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 239 – Disturbance of Quiet Enjoyment
Whoever in a manner liable to disturb public
peace enters into land quietly enjoyed by
another to whomsoever belonging, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from fifteen
days to one year.
Section 240 (Law No. 77-3 of 13 July 1977) —
False News
(1) Whoever publishes or propagates by any
means whatever any news without being able
to prove either its truth or that he had good
reason to believe it to be true, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one to
five years and with a fine of from twenty
thousand to ten million francs.
(2) The penalty shall be doubled for
anonymous publication or propagation.
Section 241 – Contempt of Race or Religion
(1) Whoever commits a contempt within the
meaning of section 152 of this Code , of the
race or re ligion of a number of citizens or
residents shall be punished with imprisonment
for from six days to six months and with fine of
from five thousand to five hundred thousands
francs.
(2) Where the offence is committed by
means of the press or wireless, the fine may
extend to twenty million francs.
(3) Where the offence is committed with
intent to arouse hatred or contempt between
citizens, the penalties provided by the two
forgoing subsections shall be doubled.
Section 242 – Discrimination
Whoever excludes another, by reason of his
race or religion from any place open to the
public or from any employment , shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one
month to two years and with fine of from five
thousand to five hundred thousand francs.
Section 243 – Public Drunkenness
(1) Whoever –
(a) Commits the offence of public
drunkenness within twelve months of a
previous conviction within the meaning of
section 88(1)(c) of this Code or;
(b) Being licensed to sell alcoholic beverages,
delivers any such beverage on his premises to
any person manifestly drunk, --
Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from fifteen days to one month and with fine
of from two thousand to thirty -five t housand
francs.
(2) Where the offender is so licensed the
court may order closure of his establishment
for up to two years, and order publication of
the judgement.
Section 244 – Subsequent Conviction
(1) Section 88(1)(b) of this Code shall apply
to any subsequent conviction under the last
forgoing section.
(2) The court may add the forfeitures
described by section 30 (1) and (2) of this Code.
(3) Where the offender is so licensed the
court may order closure of his establishment
for up to fo ur years and order publication of
the judgement.
Section 245 – Begging
Whoever having means of support, or being
able to work to obtain them, begs in any place
for alms, shall be punished with imprisonment
for from fifteen days to six months.
Section 246 – Aggravated Begging
Whoever whether or not able bodied and
having or not means of support, shall beg for
alms in any one of the manners following:
(a) with abuse threat or assault; or
(b) after entering any dwelling or enclosure
there to appurtena nt without the
occupants permission’ or
(c) feigning sores or disablement; or
(d) in company, save husband and wife, or
father and mother with their young
children, or a blind man and his guide –
shall be punished with imprisonment for
from six months to two years.
Section 247 (Law No. 72 -16 of 28 th Sept.
1972) – Vagrancy
(1) Whoever is found in a public place
being of no fixed abode and with no means
of support shall be guilty of vagrancy and
shall be punished with imprisonment for
from six months to two years.
(2) The punishment provided above shall
be doubled:
(a) Where the vagrant is found in
possession of any weapon or any instrument
with which an offence may be committed,
(b) Where the vagrant has committed (or
attempted to commit) any act of violence
against an individual or individuals.
(3) In addition, the measures prescribed
under section 42(1), (2) and (3) shall be
pronounced.
Section 248 (Ordinance No. 72 -16 of 28
Sept. 1972) – Dangerous Preparation
(1) Whoever with intent to com mit any
felony or misdemeanour carries any
instrument fit for the forcing of entry to any
immovable property shall be punished with
imprisonment for from ten days to one year.
(2) The intent shall be presumed where the
facts charged were committed at night.
Section 249 – Gaming and Lotteries
(1) Whoever without such licence as may
by law be required offers to the public with
intent to engender a hope of gain, whether
in money or in kind –
(a) Any wager or lottery; or
(b) Any other game in which chance plays a
greater part than skill, --
Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from two months to one year, or with fine of
from fifty thousand to three million francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
(2) No offer confined to the members of one
club shall constitute an offer to the public.
(3) On conviction the court may add the
forfeitures described by section 30 of this
Code, and order closure of offender’s
establishment notwithstanding that it may also
be put to another use.
(4) In addition to confiscatio n under section
35 of this Code, the court may order
confiscation of all furniture and furnishings
adapted or decorated for the attraction of
customers, and all funds and property,
movable or immovable, set aside as prize s for
the winners.
Section 250 – Pawnshops
Whoever –
(a) Without such license as may be lawfully
required keeps any pawnshop or business of
lending on a floating charge; or
(b) Having such license fails to keep such
registers as may be prescr ibed, -- shall be
punished with imprisonment for from fifteen
days to three months and with fine of from
twenty-five thousand to five hundred thousand
francs.
Section 251 – Witchcraft
Whoever commits any act of witchcraft,
magic or divination liable t o disturb public
order or tranquillity, or to harm another in his
person, property or substance, whether by
taking of a reward or otherwise, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from two to
ten years and with fine of from five thousand
to one hundred thousand francs.
CHAPTER III
PUBLIC ECONOMY
Section 252 – False Weights and Measures
Any trader or artificer keeping at his place of
trade on work any false weight or measure or
other incorrect apparatus used for the
weighing or measuring of his wares shall be
punished with imprisonment for from fifteen
days to six months or with fine of from ten
thousand to seven hundred thousand francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 253 (new) (Law No. 90 -61 of 19 th Dec.
1990) – Cheque Without Cover
(a) Whoever issues a cheque on a bank or
postal account within or without the Republic
and without pre -existing adequate or free
cover, or
(b) After issue withdraws, whether within or
without the Republic all or part of the cover or
stops payment shall be punished with penalties
laid down under section 318.
Section 254 – Auctions
Whoever by force or threat, by gift or
promise, or by any trick, disturbs the freedom
or interferes with the genuineness of any
auction or tender shall be p unished with
imprisonment for from one to six months and
with fine of from fifty thousand to one million
francs.
Section 255 – Interference with Labour
Whoever by means of force or threat, or by
fraudulent trick causes or prolongs any
concerted stoppage of work with intent
thereby to compel an increase or decrease of
wages, or to affect injuriously the freedom of
labour or of industry, shall be punish ed with
imprisonment for from fifteen days to three
years or with fine of from five thousand to
seven hundred thousand francs, or with both
such imprisonment and fine.
Section 256 – Rigging Prices
(1) Whoever by any fraudulent means causes
an artificial increase or decrease of the price of
goods or public or private securities, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from two
months to two years and with fine of from four
hundred thousand to twenty million francs.
(2) The penalty shall be doubled w here the
goods in question are foodstuff or subject to
standards regulation.
(3) On conviction the court may add the
forfeitures described in section 30(1) and (2) of
this Code, and order publication of its
judgement.
Section 257 – Destruction of Foodstuffs
Whoever with intent thereby to influence
the market in foodstuffs whether for human or
animal consumption causes or permits them to
perish, rot or disappear from circulation, shall
be punished with imprisonment  for from one
to five years and wi th fine of from fifty
thousand to one million francs.
CHAPTER IV
PUBLIC HEALTH
Section 258 – Adulteration of Foodstuffs
(1) Whoever either adulterates any
foodstuff, whether for human or animal
consumption, or beverage or medical
substance intended to be sold, or keeps any
substance designed or fit only for the purpose
of effecting such adulteration, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from three
months to three years and with fine of from
five thousand to five hundred thousand francs.
(2) Whoever keeps for sale any foodstuff
beverage or medicament adulterated,
deteriorated or harmful to human health, shall
be punished in like manner.
(3) This section shall not apply to fresh fruit
and vegetables which have fermented or
become rotten.
(4) Any such foodstuff, beverage or
medicament belonging to the offender shall be
confiscated; and where not used by the
Government, its destruction shall be at the
expense of the offender.
(5) The court may order publication of its
judgement under section 33 of this Code.
Section 259 – False Medical Certificate
(1) Any physician, surgeon, dresser or nurse,
dentist or midwife who for the advantage or
disadvantage of any person falsely certifies or
conceals the existence of any disease or
disability, or falsely certifies the performance
of results of an inoculation, or gives misleading
information on the origin of a disease, on the
duration of a disability, or on the cause of any
death, shall be punished with imprisonment for
from two months to three years an with fine of
from five thousand to one hundred thousand
francs.
(2) Where any such person has been
corrupted, the punishment shall be
imprisonment for from two to ten years
(3) On conviction, the court may impose the
forfeitures described by section 30 of this
Code.
Section 260 – Infectious Disease
(1) Whoever by his conduct facilitates the
communication of any dangerous infection
disease shall be punished with imprisonment
for from three months to three years.
(2) In the case of an infection dangerous to
life of any animal usually intended for human
consumption, the punishment shall be
imprisonment for from one month to one year.
Section 261 – Pollution of Air and Water
Whoever by his operations:
(a) Pollutes any drinkable water liable to be
used by another; or
(b) So pollutes the atmos phere as to render
it harmful human health, --
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
fifteen days to six months or with fine of from
five thousand to one million francs, or with
both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 262 – Essential Service
(1) Whoever breaks any contract of service
or supply in such circumstances that the
foreseeable consequences of such breach is
either a grave danger to public health or to the
health of patients in hospital or grave bodily
injury, or grave danger to property of an y
nature, or the deprivation of a number of
person of electricity or of water, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one to
six months.
(2) This section shall not apply to any person
who has given notice of seven days or more.
CHAPTER V
PUBLIC DECENCY
Section 263 – Public Indecency
Whoever publicly offends against decency
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
fifteen da ys to two years or with fine of from
ten thousand to one hundred thousand francs,
or with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 264 – Corruption of Morals
Whoever –
(a) Publicly utters any immoral song , cry or
speech; or
(b) Draws the atten tion of the public to any
occasion of immorality, --
Shall be punished in like manner.
Section 265 – Obscene Publication
(1)Whoever –
(a) With a view to trade, manufactures,
keeps, imports, transport or exports; or
(b) Whether or not for gain, and whether or
not publicly, exhibits or distributes –
Any writing, picture or object liable to corrupt
morals, shall be punished with imprisonment
for from one month to two years and with fine
of from ten thousand to half a million francs.
(2) On conviction the court may order
closure for up to one year of the establishment
where the offender manufactures, or keeps
any such writing, picture or object.
Section 266 – Other Objectionable
Publications
(1) Whoever publishes any account, save the
judgement, of any affiliation, divorce or judicial
separation proceedings, or of any prosecution
for abortion, shall be punished with fine of
from twenty thousand to six million.
(2) Whoever without the written permissio n
of the authority responsible for prosecution
publishes in any manner the suicide of a person
aged under eighteen years shall be punished
with fine of from twenty thousand to two
million francs and on subsequent conviction
within the meaning of section 88 of this Code,
may also be punished with imprisonment for
from two months to two years.
(3) Whoever infringes section 23(3) of this
Code shall be punished with fine of from ten
thousand to one million.
(4) Whoever publishes, whether by picture
or i n any other manner, without the written
request of the officer preparing prosecution,
the whole or any part of the circumstances of
an offence of violence or committed against a
child or against morals, shall be punished with
fine of from twenty thousand t o two hundred
thousand francs.
Section 267 – Justification of Crime
Whoever publicly justifies the felonies of
murder, depredation, arson, destruction or
felonious theft, or any felony or misdemeanour
against the security of the state, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one to
five years or with fine of from ten thousand to
twenty million francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
Section 268 – Cruelty to Animals
(1) Whoever causes needless suffering to any
animal, whether domestic , tamed or kept in
captivity, shall be punished with imprisonment
for from fifteen days to three months or with
fine of from five thousand to twenty thousand
francs, or with both such imprisonment and
fine.
(2) On conviction the court may deprive the
offender of ownership of the animal.
(3) Where the condition of the animal
renders such an order proper, the court may
order its destruction.
CHAPTER VI
PUBLIC WORSHIP
Section 269 – Freedom of Conscience
Whoever by any interference or threat
compels or prevents the practice of any form
of religion which does not involve the
commission of a criminal offence, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one
month to one year and with fine of from five
thousand to fifty thousand francs.
Section 270 – Contempt of Minister of
Religion
Whoever strikes or publicly insults a minister
of religion on account of his ministry, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one
month to three years.
Section 271 – Violent Obstruction of Ministry
Whoever obstructs by assault or threat the
exercise of his ministry by a minister of religion
shall be punished in like manner.
Section 272 – Disturbance of Public Worship
Whoever by disturbance or disorder
obstructs, delays or interrupts religious
worship in the place where it is customarily
offered, shall be punished with imprisonment
for from fifteen days to one year or with fine of
from five thousand to one hundred thousand
francs, or with both such imprisonment an d
fine.
Section 273 – Disturbance of Funeral
Whoever –
(a) Disturbs any funeral ceremony or
procession; or
(b) Defaces  any funeral monument; or
(c) Fails to perform any duty by which he is
bound to bury or burn a corps, --
Shall be pun ished with imprisonment for
from one to six months or with fine of from five
thousand to twenty -five thousand francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 274 – Violation of Graves and Corpses
(1) Whoever –
(a) Violates any tomb or any place of burial;
or
(b) Offers indignity to any human corps or
part thereof, whether buried or not –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
three months to five years and with fine of
from ten thousand to one hundred thousand
francs.
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any
dealing with a corps in the interest of science
and in accordance with any regulation in force.
PART THREE
FELONIES AND MISDEMEANOURS
AGAINST PRIVATE INTEREST
CHAPTER I
THE PERSON
A – Intentional Killing and Harm
Section 275 – Murder
Whoever causes another’s death shall be
punished with imprisonment for life.
Section 276 – Capital Murder
(1) Whoever commits murder:
(a) After premeditation; or
(b) By poisoning; or
(c) In the p reparation, facilitation or
commission of a felony or misdemeanour, or to
enable the escape, or to procure the impunity
of the offender or of an accessory to such
felony or misdemeanour, --
Shall be punished with death.
(2) Murder shall be deemed premeditated
notwithstanding that the identity of the
victim is not decided or that the
enterprise depends on the fulfilment of a
condition.
Section 277 – Grievous Harm
Whoever permanently deprives another of
the use of the whole or of any part of any
member, organ or sense shall be punished with
imprisonment for from ten to twenty years.
B – Intentional Force and Interference
Section 278 – Assault Occasioning Death
(1) Whoever by force or interference
unintentionally causes another’s death shall be
punished with imprisonment for from six to
twenty years.
(2) Where the force or interference is used in
the course of any act of witchcraft, magic or
divination t he punishment shall be
imprisonment for life.
Section 279 – Assault Occasioning Grievous
Harm
(1) Whoever by force or interference
unintentionally causes to another the injuries
described in section 277 of this Code shall be
punished with imprisonmen t for from five to
ten years, and in a fit case, with fine of from
five thousand to five hundred thousand francs.
(2) Where use is made of a weapon, of any
explosive, corrosive or toxic substance, of
poison, or of any act of witchcraft, magic or
divination, the punishment shall be for from six
to fifteen years.
Section 280 – Simple Harm
Whoever by force or interference causes
intentionally or unintentionally to another any
sickness or inability to work lasting more than
thirty days shall be punish ed with
imprisonment for from six months to five years
or with fine of from five thousand to two
hundred thousand francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
Section 281 – Slight Harm
Whoever by force or interference causes
intentionally or unint entionally to another any
sickness or inability to work lasting for more
than eight days and up to thirty days shall be
punished with imprisonment for from six days
to two years or with fine of from five thousand
to fifty thousand francs or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
Section 282 –Desertion of Incapable
(1) Whoever with intent to aba ndon him
removes any person unabl e to protect himself
by reason of his physical or mental condition
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one to three year s and with fine of from five
thousand to twenty-five thousand francs.
(2) Where the abandonment is in a lonely
place, the punishment shall be imprisonment
for from five to ten years.
(3) Where the offender is an ascendant or
any other person having authority over the
incapable or having custody of him, whether by
law or in fact, the punishment shall be
imprisonment for from ten to twenty years.
(4) Upon conviction under this section the
court may impose the forfeitures described by
section 30 of this Code and may also deprive
the offender of parental power for the same
period.
Section 283 – Failure to Assist
Whoever fails to render assistance to a
person in danger of death or grievous harm,
whether by his own endeavours or by calling
for help, where such assistance involves no risk
to himself or to any other person, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one
month to three years or with fine of from
twenty thousand to one million francs, or with
both such imprisonment and fine.
C – Common Provisions
Section 284 – Mistakes as to Victim
For the purpose of sections 275 to 281
inclusive, the infliction of death or the use of
force or interference shall be treated as
intentional notwithstanding that it is intended
to be inflicted on or used against a different
person.
Section 285 – Constructive Force
For the purpose of this Code the following
shall be treated as the use of force or as
interference:
(a) The administration of any substance
harmful to health;
(b) Desertion under section 282;
(c) Deprivation of nourishment or care, to a
degree endangering health, by a person having
custody in law or in fact of another who is
either incapable of withdrawing himself from
the said custody or incapable of pr oviding for
himself.
Section 286 – Medical Treatment
Sections 277 to 281 inclusive shall not apply
to the professional service of any person duly
authorised to render them, where performed
with the consent either of the patient or of
such person as may have custody over him:
Provided that where the patient is incapable of
consent, his spouse may consent on his behalf,
and when communication with the said spouse
or person having custody is impossible without
risk to the patient, consent shall not be
necessary.
Section 287 – Interest of Victim
The infliction of harm and the use of force
shall constitute no offence where proved to be
justified by the immediate necessity of
avoiding greater harm to the victim.
Section 288 – Sport
Sections 278 to 2 81 inclusive shall not be
applicable to anything done in the course of a
sport and in accordance with its rules.
D – Unintentional Killing and Harm
Section 289 – Unintentional Killing and Harm
(1) Whoever by lack of due skill,
carelessness, rashness or disregards for
regulation causes another’s death or such
harm, sickness or incapacity as is described in
section 277 or 280 shall be punished with
imprisonment for from  three months to five
years or with fine of from ten thousand to five
hundred thous and francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
(2) Where such harm, sickness or incapacity
as is described in section 277 or 280 is caused
by an offence against section 227 or 228(2)(a)
or (b), the imprisonment shall be from six to
twenty years.
(3) Where another’s death is caused by an
offence against section 227 or 228(2)(a) or(b),
the punishment shall be imprisonment for life.
(4) Where any offence against this section is
committed in the course of driving a vehicle
requiring driving li cense, the court may
disqualify the offender for up to three years
from holding such license and for any
subsequent offence within the meaning of
section 88 of this Code, may disqualify him for
up to ten years.
Section 290 – Drivers of Vehicle
(1) The punishment provided by section
289(1) shall be doubled for an offence
committed by the driver of any vehicle –
(a) Who is drunk or drugged when driving; or
(b) Who has not the licence required for
driving the vehicle in question; or
(c) Who with intent to avoid his liability
departs before being identified.
(2) Where such harm as is described in
section 281 is caused unintentionally in the
circumstances of the last forgoing subsection,
the driver shall be punished with imprisonment
for from six months to four years and with fine
of from ten thousand to one hundred thousand
francs.
(3) For any offence against this section, the
court may disqualify the offender for up to five
years from holding a driving licence; and on
subsequent conviction within the meaning of
section 88 of this Code, may disqualify him for
life or for any lesser term.
(4) In any case not covered by subsection
(1)(c) of this section, the driver of any vehicle
involved in an accident who with intent to
avoid his liability departs before being
identified shall be punished with imprisonment
for from one month to one year and with fine
of from twenty thousand to two hundred
thousand francs; and the court may disqualify
him for up to two years from holding a driving
licence.
CHAPTER II
PRIVATE LIBERTY AND TRANQUILLITY
A – Liberty
Section 291 – False Arrest
(1) Whoever in any manner deprives another
of his liberty shall be punished with
imprisonment for from five to ten years and
with fine of from twenty thousand to one
million francs.
(2) The punishment shall be imprisonment
for from ten to twenty years in any of the
following cases:
(a) Where the deprivation of liberty last for
more than a month; or
(b) Where it is accompanied wit h physical or
mental torture; or
(c) Where the arrest is effected with the aid
of a forged order from a public authority or of
a uniform unlawfully worn, or pretending an
appointment not held.
Section 292 – Forced Labour
Whoever for his personal advantage compels
another to do any work or to render any
service which he has not offered of his own
free will, shall be punished with imprisonment
for from one to five years or with fine of from
ten thousand to five hundred thousand francs,
or with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 293 – Slavery
(1) Whoever –
(a) Enslaves any person or keeps him in
slavery; or
(b) Engages, whether habitually or otherwise
in any traffic in person –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
ten to twenty years.
(2) Whoever gives or receives any person as
security shall be punished with imprisonment
for from one to five years and with fine of from
ten thousand to one million francs; and the
court may in addition impose the forfeitures
described in section 30 of this Code.
Section 294 (Ordinance No. 72-16 of 28th Sept.
1972) – Immoral Earning
(1) Whoever procures, aids or facilitates
another persons prostitution, or shares in the
profit of another’s prostitution, whether
habitually or otherwise, or who is subsidised by
any person engaging in prostitution shall be
punished with imprisonment for from six
months to fi ve years and with fine for from
twenty thousand to one million francs.
(2) Whoever lives with a person engaging in
prostitution shall be presumed to be subsidised
by her, unless he shows that his own resources
are sufficient to enable him to support himself.
(3) The punishment shall be doubled where:
(a) The offence is accompanied; by coercion
or by fraud or where the offender is armed; or
where he is the owner, manager or otherwise
in charge of an establishment where
prostitution is habitually practiced;
(b) Where the offence has been committed
to the detriment of any person under the age
of twenty-one;
(c) Where the offender is the father or
mother; guardian or person with customary
responsibility.
(4) In the cases referred to under subsection
3, the provisions of section 48 shall be applied.
(5) The court may impose the forfeitures
described in section 30 of this Code and
disqualify the offender for the same period
from being guardian or curator of any person
and from having cus tody, customary or
otherwise, of any person under the age of
twenty-one
(6) Upon conviction under subsection 3(a) of
this section, the court shall order closure of the
establishment to whatever other use it may be
put.
(7) The prostitute herself shall not be treated
as accessory to any offence under this section.
B – Sexual Offences
Section 295 – Private Indecency
(1) Whoever in any place notwithstanding
that it may not be open to the public, commits
an indecent act in the presence of any pers on
of either sex and without his consent shall be
punished with imprisonment for from fifteen
days to two years or with fine of from ten
thousand to one hundred thousand francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
(2) The punishment shall be doubl ed where
the offence is accompanied by assault.
Section 296 – Rape
Whoever by force or moral ascendency
compels any female whether above or below
the age of puberty to have sexual intercourse
with him shall be punished with imprisonment
for from five to ten years.
Section 297 – Subsequent Marriage
Marriage freely consented between the
offender and the victim if over puberty at the
time of commission shall have on any offence
under either of the last two forgoing sections
the effect of section 73(1) to (4) of this Code.
Section 298 – Aggravation
The penalties prescribed by sections 294,
295 and 296 shall be doubled where the
offender –
(a) Has authority over the victim, or custody
of him by law or by custom; or
(b) Is a public servant or minister of religion;
or
(c) Is helped by one or more others.
C – Personal Tranquillity
Section 299 – Invasion of Residence
(1) Whoever enters or remains in another’s
residence against his will shall be punished
with imprisonment for from ten days to one
year or with fine of from five thousand to fifty
thousand francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
(2) The penalty shall be doubled for an
offence committed at night or with the aid of
force, threats or other interference.
(3) No prosecution may be commenced
without the complaint of the injured party.
Section 300 – Tampering with Correspondence
(1) Whoever without permission from the
addressee destroys, conceals or opens
another’s correspondence shall be punished
with imprisonment for from fifteen days to one
year or with fine of from five thousand to one
hundred thousand francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
(2) This section shall not apply as between
spouses, to par ents in respect of their children
under twenty -one years of age and
unemancipated, or to guardians or person
responsible by custom in respect of their
wards.
Section 301 – Simple Threats
Whoever by any writing or picture threatens
another with force o r interference, or with the
destruction of any property, or with breaking in
to his residence, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from ten days to three years
and with fine of from five thousand to five
hundred and fifty thousand francs.
Section 302 – Conditional Threats
(1) Whoever threatens another, expressly or
by implication, with force or other interference
in case of his failure to comply with any order
or condition shall be punished with
imprisonment for from ten days to six months
and with fine of from five thousand to twenty -
five thousand francs.
(2) Where the force or interference would
constitute a felony punishable with death or
with imprisonment fo r life, the punishment
shall be:
(a)Imprisonment for from six months to
three yea rs and fine of from five thousand to
seventy thousand francs for verbal threats;
(b) Imprisonment for from two to five years
and fine of from ten thousand to two hundred
and fifty thousand francs for threats in writing
or picture; and the court may in addition
impose the forfeitures described in section 30
of this Code.
Section 303 – Blackmail
(1) Whoever threatens another with
defamatory imputation or with any revelation
in case of his failure to comply with any order
or condition shall be punishe d with
imprisonment for from one to five years and
with fine of from two hundred thousand to two
million francs.
(2) The penalty shall be doubled for
imputation of a felony,
(3) The court may in addition impose the
forfeitures described in section 30 of this Code.
Section 304 – False Report
(1) Whoever makes to any person in
authority, whether public or private, a false
report liable to lead to prosecution or to
disciplinary measures shall be punished with
imprisonment for from six months to five years
and with fine of from ten thousand to one
million francs, unless he shows that he had
good reasons to believe the report to be true.
(2) Imprisonment shall be for f rom two to
five years where the false report is anonymous.
(3) Where in consequence of the report a
criminal prosecution is comm enced in the trial
in court in respect of the facts reported, any
prosecution for false report shall be stayed
until final judgment.
(4) The court may order publication of its
judgement.
Section 305 (new) (Law No. 93 -013 of 22 nd
Dec. 1993) – Defamation
(1) Whoever by any of the means describe in
section 152 injures the honour or reputation of
another by imputations, direct or indirect, of
facts which he is unable to prove shall be
punished with imprisonment for from six days
to six months and with fine of from five
thousand to two million francs, or with only
one of the penalties.
(2) These penalties shall also apply to
persons guilty of defamation in print and
audio-visual media without prejudice to the
right of reply and the obligation to publ ish
corrections.
(3) No prove may be offered of the truth of a
defamatory imputation where;
(a)It concerns the private life of the person
defamed; or
(b) It refers to a fact more than ten years old;
or
(c) It refers to a fact constituting a n offence
which has been amnestied or the conviction for
which has been otherwise expunged.
(4) No prosecution may be commence
without the compliant of the injured party or
of his representative by law or by custom, or
continued after the withdrawal of the
compliant.
(5) Prosecution shall be barred by the laps of
four months from the commission of the
offence or from the last step in preparation or
prosecution.
(6) This section shall ap ply to defamation of
the memory of a deceased person with intent
to injure the honour or reputation of his living
heirs, spouse or universal legatee.
(7) The penalty shall be halved for a
defamation which is not public.
(8) The punishment shall be doubled for
anonymous defamation.
Section 306 – Exceptions to Defamation
The following shall constitute no offence:
(1) Speeches within any legislative assembly,
or any report or other document printed by
order of any such assembly;
(2) Faithfull account without malice of the
public sittings of any such assembly;
(3) Proceedings in court and the speeches
made and documents produced in court;
(4) Faithful account without malice of all
such proceedings and speeches, save only of a
prosecution or action for defamation;
(5) Publication of any judgment or judicial
order, including those passed in a prosecution
or action for defamation;
(6) An official report without malice by a
person lawfully appointed to conduct an
enquiry to the extent that it is germane to the
enquiry;
(7) Imputation without malice of a superior
on his subordinate;
(8) In formation on any person given without
malice to a third party having an interest,
personal or official , in receiving it, or having
power to remedy an alleged injustice;
(9) Criticism of any work of art
entertainment or opinion shown, expressed in
public, provided that such criticism be not an
expression of personal animosity;
(10) Any work of historical nature and
without malice.
Section 307 – Abuse
(1) Whoever uses without having been
provoked against any person in the
circumstances of publicity described in section
152 any insulting expression, or contemptuous
gesture or words, or invective without
imputation of fact, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from five days to three
months or with fine of from five thousand to
one hundred thousand francs, or with both
such imprisonment and fine.
(2) No prosecution may be commenced
without the complaint of the injured party or
of his representative by law or by custom, or
continued after withdrawal of complaint.
(3) Prosecution shall be barred by the laps of
four months from the commission of the
offence or from the last step in preparation or
prosecution.
(4) This section shall apply to abuse of the
memory of a deceased person in the
circumstances prescribed by section 305(5).
Section 308 – Extortion of Disposition or
Signature
(1) Whoever by force coercion or fraud
extorts the signature, or the delivery of any
document having the effect of an ob ligation,
discharge or disposition, or otherwise liable to
harm the signatory in his person or in his
substance, shall be punished with
imprisonment for from five to ten years and
with fine of from ten thousand to five hundred
thousand francs.
(2) Whoever procures by the like means the
delivery of a signed blank paper and fills it up
with any obligation, discharge or disposition
shall be punished in like manner.
CHAPTER III
CONFIDENCE
Section 309 – Signature in Blank
Whoever, being entru sted with a signed
blank paper takes advantage of it to insert any
unauthorised obligation, discharge or
disposition or any other writing liable to harm
the signatory in his person or in his substance
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one to fiv e years or with fine of from five
thousand to five hundred thousand francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 310 – Professional Confidence
(1) Whoever without permission from the
person interested in secrecy reveals any
confidential fact which has come to his
knowledge or which has been confided to him
solely by reason of his profession or duties
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
three months to three years and with fine of
from twenty thousand to one hundred
thousand francs.
(2) Subsection (1) shall apply neither to
statements to the prosecution or police
concerning facts which may amount to a felony
or misdemeanour, nor to answers in cou rt to
any question whatever.
(3) Nothing in subsection (2) shall release
from the duty of professional confidence:
(a) A physician or surgeon, save within the
scope of a commission from the prosecution or
of his reference as an expert referee;
(b) A public servant under orders in writing
from the Government;
(c) A minister of religion or counsel.
(4) Upon conviction the court may or der the
forfeitures described by section 30 of this
Code.
Section 311 – Commercial Confidence
(1) Whoever reveals without permission
from the person interested in secrecy any
confidential fact or process which has come to
his knowledge or which has been confided to
him solely by reason of his employment in an
industrial or commercial undertaking shall be
punished with imprisonment for from three
months to three years or with fine of from one
hundred thousand to five million francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
(2) Upon conviction the court may order the
forfeitures described by section 3 0 of this
Code.
Section 312 – Corruption of Employee
Any employee in receipt of any form of
emolument who without the permission of his
employer receives any gifts or accepts any
promise for doing or omitting any act of his
employment shall be punishe d with
imprisonment for from one to three years or
with fine of from fifty thousand to five hundred
thousand francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
Section 313 – Deception of Shareholder
(1) Any director, manager or auditor of a
company or p artnership who with intent to
mislead any partner, shareholder or creditor,
makes a false declaration or submits a false
account shall be punished with imprisonment
for from one to five years and with fine of from
fifty thousand to one million francs.
(2) The court may in addition impose the
forfeitures described in section 30 of this Code.
Section 314 – Forgery
(1) Whoever forges or alters, whether in its
substance or in the signature of parties or
witnesses or in its date, any private document
having the effect of an obligation, discharge or
disposition shall be punished with
imprisonment for from three to eight years and
with fine of from fifty thousand to one million
francs.
(2) The penalty shall be imprisonment for
from five to ten years an d fine of from one
hundred thousand to two million francs where
the document is:
(a) Commercial or bank paper; or
(b) Evidence of a right to land; or
(c) A power to sign any document described
by subsection (a) or (b); or
(d) A will.
(3) Whoever makes use of –
(a) Any document described in this section;
or
(b) Of an expired document of like nature
representing it to be still effective; or
(c) Of a document of like nature referring to
another person for whom he passes himsel f
off—shall be punished in like manner as if he
has forged the document.
Section 315 – False or Forged Certificate
(1) Whoever forges or alters a private
certificate or issues a false certificate, where
such issue is not otherwise punished, or who
makes use of a forged, altered or false private
certificate shall be punished with
imprisonment for from one month to one year.
(2) The penalty shall be doubled for forgery,
alteration or use of a medical certificate or of
any private document not desc ribed by section
314.
CHAPTER IV
PROPERTY
Section 316 – Destruction
(1) Whoever destroys the whole or any part
of any property belonging wholly or in part to
another or charged in favour of another shall
be punished with imprisonment for fr om
fifteen days to three years or with fine of from
five thousand to one hundred thousand francs,
or with both such imprisonment and fine.
(2) The penalty shall be imprisonment for
from two to ten years or fine of from ten
thousand to five hundred thou sand francs, or
both such imprisonment and fine, where the
property in question is a building, construction,
ship, plant or installation.
Section 317 – Boundary Marks and Fences
Whoever –
(a) Destroys, removes or displaces a
boundary stone or any other mark set up to
show the boundary between properties; or
(b) Destroys any fence of whatever nature –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
fifteen days to one year and with fine of from
five thousand to fifty thousand francs.
B – Against Proprietary Interest
Section 318 (new) (Law No. 90 -61 of 19 Dec.
1990) – Theft, Misappropriation and False
Pretence
(1) Whoever causes loss to another:
(a)By theft, that is by removing his property,
or
(b) By misappropriation, that is by
destruction, waste, conversion, of any property
capable of being removed entrusted to him for
the purpose of custody, return, accounting or
any particular manner of dealing.
Provided that this paragraph shall apply neither
to money loaned nor to a consumer good s
loaned;
(c) By false pretence, that is by influencing
him deceitfully by tricks or by
misrepresentation or concealment of any
matter of fact;
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
five to ten years and with fine of from one
hundred thousand to one million francs.
(2) The court may in addition impose the
forfeitures described in section 30 of this Code.
Section 319 – Special Theft s and
Misappropriations
Section 318 shall apply to –
(1) The unauthorised appropriation of any
generated energy;
(2) The unauthorised use of any property,
without the inten tion to deprive the owner of
it; and
(3) The taking of lost property; and
(4) The taking or misappropriation by a
debtor of his own property charged with the
debt.
Section 320 – (new) (Law No.90 -61 of 19 Dec.
1990) – Aggravated Theft
(1) The penalties provided for in section 318
shall be doubled if the theft was committed:
(a) With force; or
(b) Bearing weapons; or
(c) By breaking in, by climbing in, or by
use of false key; or
(d) With a motor vehicle.
(2) Whoever commits a theft by the use of
force causing the death of another or grievous
harm  as provided for in section 277 and 279 of
the Penal Code shall be punished with death.
Section 321 (Ordinance No. 72 -16 of 28 th Sept
1972) – Aggravated Misappropriation and
False Pretence
The penalties prescribed by section 318 shall
be doubled for misappropriation or false
pretence committed –
(a) By counsel or by notary, public
auctioneer, bailiff, process server or business
agent;
(b) By an employee or employer against his
employer or employee;
(c) By an offender advertising or who has
advertised publicly.
Section 322 – Credit by Fraud and Fraudulent
Retention
(1)Whoever being unable to pay for them:
(a) Orders and consumes on the spot any
food or drink; or
(b) Occupies any room in a hotel; or
(c) Hires a taxi,
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
five days to six months and with fine of from
five thousand to twenty-five thousand francs.
(2) The acts described in subsection (1)(a)
and (b) shall constitute no offence if the supply
of food or drink or the accommodation
continues for more than one week.
(3) Whoever without just cause retains
anything belonging to another shall be
punished in like manner.
Section 323 – Between Relatives
Sections 318, 319 and 322 shall not be
applicable to a person guilty of the act therein
described against hiss spouse, against his
legitimate or adoptive or adopted ascendant or
descendant, or against his natural ascendant or
descendant up to the second degree either
living with him or after recognition, or to a
surviving spouse in respect of necessaries
belonging to the deceased spouse.
Section 324 – (new) (Law No.90 -61 of 19 Dec.
1990) – Receiving
(1) Whoever holds disposes of any thing
procured by the commission of misdemeanour,
whether knowingly or having reason to suspect
the criminal origin of the property, shall be
punished with thee penalties prescribed by
section 318.
(2) In case of felony, the punishment shall be
doubled.
Section 325 – Usury
(1) Any lender demanding or taking interest
or any other reward higher than the rate fixed
by law for loans of the kind in question, shall
be punished with fine of from five thousand to
one million francs.
(2) On subsequent conviction within the
meaning of section 88 of this Code, the penalty
shall be imprisonment for from fifteen days to
one year and the fine shall be doubled.
(3) The court may order publication of its
judgement under section 33 of this Code.
(4) For the purpose of this section, the
borrower shall not be treated as an accessory.
Section 326 – Forbidden Sales
Whoever –
(a) So offers any goods to the public as to
engender the hope of obtaining them free or at
a reduced price in consideration of persuading
others to take up coupons or to buy; or
(b) Sends goods to an addressee who has not
ordered them, giving him the choice between
keeping them and se nding them back whether
or not at his expense –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one month to one year or with fine of from two
hundred thousand to two million francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
Section 327 – Copyright
(1) Whoever in disobedience to the laws and
regulations governing copyrights:
(a) Publishes in whole or in part any writing,
musical composition, drawing, painting or any
other printed or engraved matter; or
(b) Trades in, import or exports any such
infringement; or
(c) Produce, present s or disseminates by
whatever means any work of the intelligence –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
three months to two years and with fine of
from twenty thousand to five hundred
thousand francs.
(2) The court shall also order the confiscation
of the matter constituting the infringement,
and of all plates, moulds and dies used for it,
together with the proceeds of the unlawful
production, presentation or dissemination, the
whole to be applied to the compensation of
the injured parties.
(3) The court may order publication of its
judgment under section 33 of this Code.
Section 328 – Patents
(1) Whoever infringes a p atent, or who
conceals, sells exports or imports any object
constituting such infringement shall be
punished with fine of from fifty thousand to
three hundred thousand francs.
(2) Upon subsequent conviction within the
meaning of section 88 of this Code, or where
the offender is or has been employed in an
undertaking where the patent is lawfully
exploited, the offender ma y be punished in
addition with imprisonment for from one to six
months.
(3) In either case, the court shall order
confiscation and delivery to the patentee of
any object constituting an infringement and
may order publication of its judgement under
section 33 of this Code.
(4) No prosecution may be commenced
except on complaint by the patentee.
Section 329 – Trade, Designs and Patterns
(1) Whoever infringes a registered design or
pattern shall be punished with fine of from fifty
thousand to three hundred thousand francs.
(2) Upon subsequent conviction within the
meaning of section 88of this Code, or where
the offender is or has been e mployed by the
injured party, the offender may be punished in
addition with imprisonment for from one to six
months.
(3) In either case, the court shall order
confiscation and delivery to the injured party
of any object infringing the rights protected,
and may order publication of its judgement
under section 33 of this Code and disqualify
the offender for up to ten years from electing
or being elected to any chamber of commerce
(4) No prosecution may be commenced
except on complaint by the injured party.
Section 330 – Trademarks
(1) Whoever forges a registered trademark
or uses any trademark so forged shall be
punished with imprisonment for from three
months to three years or with fine of from fifty
thousand to three hundred thousand francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
(2) Whoever without forgery of a registered
trademark imitates it in manner liable to
mislead a purchaser or uses any such imitation
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one month to one year or with fine of from
fifty thousand to one hundred and fifty
thousand francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
(3) In either case, the court shall order
confiscation and delivery to the owner of the
forged or imitates trademark, and may also
order publication of its judgement under
section 33 of t his Code and disqualify the
offender for up to ten years from electing or
being elected to any chamber of commerce.
C – Insolvency
Section 331 – Fraudulent Debtor
(1) Any debtor whether or not a trader, who
with intent to avoid payment to one or more
creditors gives, delivers, transfers, encumbers,
removes, or conceals the whole or any part of
his property shall be punished with
imprisonment for from fifteen days to one
year.
(2) The intent shall be presumed in the case
of removal or concealment within two months
before judgement against the offender.
Section 332 – Culpable Bankruptcy
(1) Any trader –
(a)Whose personal or household expenses
are exaggerated; or
(b) Who spends large sums on operations of
pure chance or on fictitious dealings either in
securities or in goods; or
(c) Who contracts on account of another
without receiving consideration obligation
which in view of his position at the time we re
unreasonable –
Shall be punished, where such conducts either
results in or follows his insolvency, with
imprisonment for from one month to two
years.
(2) Any trader who being insolvent --
(a) Engages in purchase for sale below the
market price, or in loans or negotiations of
papers or other extravagant means of
obtaining funds; or
(b) Prefers one creditor to the rest; or
(c) Within fifteen days of insolvency, fails to
lodge in the register the complete statement
required by law –
Shall be punished in like manner.
(3) Any trader adjudicated bankrupt –
(a) In respect of a further insolvency before
compliance with a previous deed of
arrangement; or
(b) Who has infringed the regulations
governing the business register; or
(c) Who has kept no book s and made no
exact inventory, or has kept his book s and
made his inventory incompletely or
irregularly, or has kept such books or made
such inventories as without fraud do not
show the true state of his assets or liabilities;
or
(d) Who without reasonable excuse fails to
present himself personally to the trustees in
the case and within the time prescribed –
Shall be punished in like manner.
(4) Any banker, stockbroker or other broker
becoming insolvent with or without any
such circumstances shall be punished i n
like manner.
Section 333 – Fraudulent Bankruptcy
(1) Any trader becoming insolvent and --
(a) Removing his books; or
(b) Converting or concealing any part of
his assets; or
(c) In his books or by any document
notarial or otherwise, or in his balance
sheet acknowledging debt which he
does not owe –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from five to ten years.
(2) The penalty shall be doubled where
the trader is a banker, stockbroker or
other broker.
Section 334 – Corporation or Partnership
(1) Any person empowered to act on behalf
of a corporation or partnership who:
(a)Commits on its behalf any act described in
section 332(1)(b) or(c), (2)(a) or (b), or (3)(c); or
(b) With intent to withdraw the whole, or
any part of his own property from the claims of
a corporation or partnership which has ceased
payment or from those of the shareholders or
partners or of the creditor of the corporation
or partnership, converts or conceals any part of
his property, or acknowl edges debts which he
does not owe –
Shall be punished with the penalties prescribed
by section 332.
(2) Any such person so committing any act
described by section 333(1) shall be punished
with the penalties prescribed by that
subsection.
Section 335 – Offences by Others than the
Debtor
(1) Whoever –
(a) In the interest of an insolvent trader
removes or conceals the whole or part of the
latter’s property; or
(b) In insolvency proceedings makes proof
directly or indirectly of a false debt –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
five to ten years.
(2) The trader’s spouse, ascendant or
descendant, who whether as his accessory or
otherwise converts or conceals the whole or
any part of his assets shall be punished with
imprisonment for from one to five years.
Section 336 – Fraudulent Creditor
(1) Any creditor who, after the
commencement of solvency proceedings:
(a) Agrees to receive, whether from the
insolvent or from another, any private
advantage in consideration of his vote in the
insolvency proceedings; or
(b) Makes any private arrangement for
preferences in the distribution of the assets of
the insolvency –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one month to one year and with fine of from
twenty thousand to five hundred thousand
francs.
(2) The penalty shall be doubled where the
offender is the trustee.
CHAPTER V
CHILDREN AND THE FAMILY
Section 337 – Abortion
(1) Any woman procuring or consenting to
her own abortion shall be punished with
imprisonment for from fifteen days to one year
or with fine of from five thousand to two
hundred thousand francs, or with both such
imprisonment and fine.
(2) Whoever procures the abortion of a
woman, notwithstanding her consent, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from one to
five years and with fine of from one hundred
thousand to two million francs.
(3) The penalty prescribed by subsection (2)
shall be doubled where the offender –
(a) engages habitually in abortion; or
(b)Practises the profession of medicine or an
allied profession
(4) In the circumstances of subsection (3)(b),
the court may also order closure of the
professional premises and impose a ban on his
occupation under sections 34 and 36 of this
Code.
Section 338 – Assault on Woman with Child
Whoever by force used against a woman
with child or against a child being born causes
intentionally or unintentionally t he death or
permanent incapacity of the child shall be
punished with imprisonment for from five to
ten years and with fine of from one hundred
thousand to two million francs.
Section 339 – Saving Mother
(1) Neither of the two forgoing sections shall
apply to acts performed by a qualified person
and proved necessary for the saving of the
mother from grave danger to her health.
(2) In the case of pregnancy resulting from
rape, abortion by a qualified medical
practitioner after certificate by the pros ecution
of a good case shall constitute no offence.
Section 340 – Infanticide
The punishment for murder within the
meaning of section 275 or 276 or for abetment
of such murder, by a mot her of her child one
month of birth shall be reduced to
imprisonment for from five to ten years.
Provided that nothing in this section shall
reduce the penalty as against any other
offender or accessory.
Section 341 – Cloud on Parentage
Any person whose conduct has the result of
depriving a child of the evidence of his true
parentage shall be punished with
imprisonment for from five to ten years.
Section 342 – Slavery and Giving in Security
Where the victim of an offence against
section 293 of this Code is under eighteen
years of age:
(a) The penalty under the first subsection
shall be imprisonment for from fifteen to
twenty years; and
(b) The penalty under the second subsection
shall be imprisonment for from five to ten
years and a fine of from fifty thousand to one
million francs, and the court may in addition
impose the forfeitures described in section 30
of this Code.
Section 343 – (Ordinance No.72 -16 of 28 th
Sept. 1972) – Immoral Earnings
Where the victim of an of fence against
section 294 of this Code is under eighteen
years of age, the penalties prescribed by that
section shall be doubled subject to a maximum
of ten years imprisonment.
Section 344 (Ordinance No. 72-16 of 28th Sept.
1972) – Corruption of Youth
(1) Whoever, in order to satisfy the desires of
another person, habitually excites, encourage
or facilitates the debauch or corruption of any
person under the age of eighteen years of age
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one to five years and with fine of from twenty
thousand to one million francs.
(2) Upon conviction the court may order the
forfeitures described in section 30 of this Code
and deprive the offender for the same period
of parental power and disqualify him from
being guardian or curator of any minor.
Section 345 – Moral Danger
Whoever having by law or by custom custody
of a person under eighteen years of age, allows
him to reside or work in an establishment
where prostitution is habitually practised, or to
work in prostitu tes’ house shall be punished
with imprisonment for from fifteen days to six
months and with fine of from ten thousand to
one hundred thousand francs.
Section 346 (Ordinance No. 72-16 of 28th Sept.
1972) – Indecency to Child under Sixteen
(1) Whoever commits an indecent act in the
presence of a child under the age of sixteen
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
two to five years and with fine for from twenty
thousand to two hundred thousand francs.
(2) The penalty shall be doubled where the
offence is accompanied by assault or where the
offender is one of the persons described in
section 298.
(3) The penalty shall be imprisonment for
from ten to fifteen years where the offender
has sexual intercourse with the victim
notwithstanding his or her consent.
(4) In the case of rape, the imprisonment
shall be from fifteen to twenty -five years, or
for life where the offender is one of the
persons described by section 298.
(5) Upon conviction under this section, the
court may deprive the off ender of parental
power and disqualify him from being guardian
or curator of any minor for the time prescribed
by section 31(4) of this Code.
Section 347 (Ordinance No. 72-16 of 28th Sept.
1972) – Indecency to minor Between Sixteen
and Twenty-one
(1) For any offence un der sections 295, 296
and 347 a of this Code committed against a
person over sixteen and under twenty -one
years of age, the penalty shall be doubled.
(2) Upon conviction under this section, the
court may deprive the offender of parenta l
power and disqualify him from being guardian
or curator of any minor for the time prescribed
by section 31(4) of this Code.
Section 347a (Ordinance No. 72-16 of 28 Sept.
1972) – Homosexuality
Whoever has sexual relation with a person of
the same sex shall be punished with
imprisonment for from six months to five years
and fine of from twenty thousand to two
hundred thousand francs.
Section 248 – Drink
(1) Whoever:
(a) Being licensed to sell intoxicating liquor
for consumption on the premises admits to the
said premises any person under sixteen years
of age not accompanied by a person over
twenty-one responsible for superintending
him; or
(b) Being licensed to sell beverages for
consumption on the premises sells or offers,
whether on the s aid premises or in any other
public place, any intoxicating liquor to any
person under eighteen years of age not
accompanied by a person over twenty -one
responsible for superintending him; or
(c) Makes any person under twenty -one
years of age drunk –
Shall be punished with fine for from five
thousand to fifty thousand francs.
(2) Upon subsequent conviction within the
meaning of section 88 of this Code, the
punishment shall be imprisonment for from
fifteen days to one month and fine of from ten
thousand to one hundred thousand francs; and
the court may in addition order:
(a) Closure of the licensed premises under
section 34 of this Code;
(b) Publication of its judgement;
(c) As against any offender the forfeitures
described in section 30 of this code.
(3) This section shall not apply to any person
proving that he was misled as to the age of the
minor or as to the age or authority of the
person accompanying him.
Section 349 – Advantage of Weakness
(1) Whoever takes advantage of the needs,
weakness, passions of any person under
twenty-one years of age to induce him to sign
any obligation, discharge or disposition or any
other document liable to harm the signatory in
his person or in his substance, shall be
punished with the penalty pr escribed by
section 318 of this Code.
(2) For the purpose of this section, any
lunatic notorious or so found, and any
spendthrift so found, shall be treated as a
minor.
Section 350 – Assault on Child
(1) The penalties prescribed by section 275
on the one hand and by sections 277and 278
on the other, shall become death and
imprisonment for life respectively where the
offence are committed against a person under
fifteen years of age, and the penalties
prescribed by sections 279(1), 280 and 281
shall be doubled.
(2) Upon conviction for misdemeanour under
this section, the court may order the
forfeitures described in section 30 of this Code
Section 351 – Assault on Ascendant
The penalties prescribed by section 275 on
the one hand and by sections 277 and 278 on
the other shall become death and
imprisonment for life respectively where the
offence are committed against the legitimate,
natural or adoptive father or mother of t he
offender, or against any other legitimate
ascendant, and the penalties prescribed by
section 279(1), 280 and 281 shall be doubled.
Section 352 – Kidnapping
(1) Whoever without force or fraud entices
away any person under eighteen years of age,
against the will of those to whom custody
belongs by law or by custom, or procures him
to leave that custody shall be punished with
imprisonment for from one to five years and
with fine of from twenty thousand to two
hundred thousand francs.
Provided that this subsection shall not apply to
a person proving that he was misled as to the
age of the minor.
(2) This section shall not apply where the
minor so taken enticed or procured marries the
kidnapper.
Provided that the marriage be not annulled
Section 353 – Kidnapping by Force or Fraud
Whoever by force or fraud takes or entices
away any person under the age of twenty -one
years, notwithstanding that he thought him
older, and against the will of those to whom
custody belongs b y law or by custom or
procures him to leave that custody, shall be
punished with imprisonment for from five to
ten years and with fine of from twenty
thousand to four hundred thousand francs.
Section 354 – Aggravated Kidnapping
(1) The punishment for kidnapping under
either of the two last forgoing sections shall be
imprisonment for life where:
(a) The person kidnapped is under the age of
thirteen; or
(b) The offender commits the offence with
intent to obtain a ransom or obtains a ransom.
(2) The punishment shall be death where the
minor dies as a result of the kidnapping.
Section 355 – Failure to Return a Child
Whoever being in charge of a child fails to
return him to those  having the right to claim
him back shall be punished with imp risonment
for from one to five years and with fine of from
twenty thousand to two hundred thousand
francs.
Section 356 – Forced Marriage
(1) Whoever compels any one to marry shall
be punished with imprisonment for from five
to ten years and with fine of from twenty -five
thousand to one million francs.
(2) Where the victim is under the age of
eighteen the punishment may not be less than
two years imprisonment, whatever the
mitigating circumstances.
(3) Whoever gives in marriage a boy under
sixteen years of age or a girl under fourteen,
shall be punished as under the two last
forgoing subsections.
(4) Upon conviction, the court may deprive
the offender of parental power and disqualifies
him from being the gua rdian or curator of any
person for the time prescribed by section 31(4)
of this Code.
Section 357 – Abuse In Respect of Bride-Price
(1) Whoever –
(a) Receives from a third party the whole or
any part of a bride -price for the promise in
marriage of a woman already married or bound
by a betrothal not yet broken off; or
(b) Receives the whole or any part of a bride-
price before refund to any earlier suitor; or
(c) Receives without any right to it the whole
or any part of a bride -price for the marriage of
a woman; or
(d) De mands the whole or any part of an
excessive bride-price for the marriage of a girl
over twenty-one years of age or of a widow or
divorced woman; or
(e) For want of compliance with his excessive
demands for bride -price of the marriage of a
girl under th e age of twenty -one, and for
another reason, obstructs her marriage; or
(f) Receives as heir any such consideration
promised to the person from whom he inherits
– Shall be punished with imprisonment for
from one to five years or with fine of from five
thousand to five hundred thousand francs, or
with both such imprisonment and fine.
(2) Time shall begin to run again for
prosecution on payment of the bride price or
of any instalment.
Section 358 – Desertion
(1) Any spouse or paren t who without just
cause evades, whether by desertion of the
family home or otherwise howsoever, the
whole or any part of his moral or material
obligations towards his spouse or children shall
be punished with imprisonment for from three
months to one year or with fine of from five
thousand to five hundred thousand francs.
(2) Where a spouse alone has been deserted,
no prosecution may be commenced without
his or her complaint.
(3) The same punishment shall apply to a
guardian or person responsible by custom who
evades his obligations by law or custom
towards any child in his custody.
(4) Upon conviction, the court may order the
forfeitures described in section 30 of this Code,
disqualify the offender from being guardian or
curator of any child for the time fix ed by
section 31(4), and for the same period deprive
him of parental power in respect of any one or
more of his children.
(5) Where the person who received payment
of the whole or a part of the bride -price is
accessory to a wife’s offence, he shall be
punished with imprisonment for from three
months to one year and with fine of from fifty
thousand to five hundred thousand francs.
Section 359 – Bigamy
(1) Whoever –
(a) Being polygamous contracts a
monogamous marriage before the dissolution
of all previous marriages; or
(b) Being bound by an undertaking of
monogamy contracts any marriage before the
dissolution of any previous marriage; or
(c) Being married under the codified law
contracts any marriage before the dissolution
of that former marriage –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
two months to two years and with fine of from
twenty-five thousand to five hundred thousand
francs.
(2) The burden of proving dissolution of any
previous marriage shall fall on the accused.
Section 360 – Incest
(1) Without prejudice to the penalties
prescribed by section 346(3) and 347(1),
whoever has sexual intercourse with:
(a) Any legitimate or natural ascendant or
descendant in the direct line without limit of
degree; or
(b) His brother or sister, whether legitimate
or natural and whether of the whole or half
blood –
Shall be punished with imprisonment for from
one to three years and with fine of from
twenty thousand to five hundred thousand
francs.
(2) Save in cas e of notorious concubinage or
of incestuous marriage, no prosecution may be
commenced without the complaint of a
relative by blood in whatever degree.
Section 361 – Adultery
(1) Any married woman having sexual
intercourse with a man other than her husband
shall be punished with imprisonment for from
two to six months and with fine of from
twenty-five thousand to one hundred thousand
francs.
(2) Any married man having sexual
intercourse in the matrimonial home, or
habitually having sexual intercours e else
where, with a woman other than his wife or
wives, shall be punished in like manner.
(3) No prosecution may be commenced
without the complaint of the wronged spouse.
(4) The connivance or condonation of the
wronged spouse shall bar the commen cement
or continuation of any prosecution and consent
by the wronged spouse to resume cohabitation
shall put an end to the effect of conviction.
PART FOUR
SIMPLE OFFENCES
CHAPTER I
GENERAL
Section 362 – Classes of Simple Offence
Subject to section 101(2) of this Code, there
shall be four classes of simple offences
punished with the following penalties:
(a) First Class; fine of from two hundred to
twelve hundred francs;
(b) Second Class; fine of from fourteen
hundred to two thousand four hundred
francs;
(c) Third Class; fine of from two thousand six
hundred to three thousand six hundred
francs;
(d) Fourth Class; fine of from four thousand
to twenty -five thousand francs or
imprisonment for from five to ten days
or both such fine and imprisonment.
Section 363 – Subsequent Conviction
In addition to the doubling of maximum
penalty provided by section 88(1)(c) of this
Code, the court may, on conviction for a simple
offence of the first, second or third class after a
previous conviction within the meaning o f the
said section, pass sentence of imprisonment
for from five to ten days.
SIMPLE OFFENCES
(Decree No. 67-DF-322 of 20th July 1967)
Section R. 364 – Imprisonment in Default
(1) Imprisonment in default shall take place
in respect of the payment of fines.
(2) The term of such imprisonment shall be
fixed at five days for simple offences of the first
class, ten days for simple offences for those of
the second class and one month for those of
the third and fourth classes.
Provided that no co nvicted person shall detain
for more than fifteen days under this section if
he proves that he is insolvent.
Section R. 365 – Precedence
In case of insufficient assets, restitution and
compensation due to the wronged party shall
take precedence over the fine.
Section R. 366 – Restitution
Judgements awarding restitution,
compensation or cost shall entail
imprisonment in default and the convicted
person shall remain in prison until full payment
has been made.
Provided that where the judgement makes
such an award in favour of the State and the
convicted person is insolvent, the latter may
not be detained for more than fifteen days.
Section R. 367 – Simple Offences of the First
Class
The following persons shall be punished with
a fine of from two hundred to twelve hundred
francs:
(1) Those who fail to maintain, repair or
clean ovens, chimneys or factories in
which fire is used
(2) Those who violate the prohibition to let
off, in certain places fireworks,
furthermore, firework seized shall be
confiscated.
(3) Innkeepers and others who, being
required to provide lighting fail to do so
and those who cut off lighting which has
been provided in the public interest.
(4) Those who fail to clean the streets and
passage ways in localities where the local
residents are respo nsible for such
cleaning.
(5) Those who encumber a highway by
depositing or leaving unnecessarily
thereon any material or object which
obstructs or impairs the right of way or
safety of traffic, and those who, in
violation of the laws and regulations,
neglect to illuminate a material stored by
them or excavation work done by them
in a public place or on a highway.
(6) Those who throw or expose in front of
their house any object capable of causing
harm either by its fall or by noxious
fumes.
(7) Those who do not comply with the law
and regulation concerning the campaign
against parasites of every kind in the
country side and in cultivated areas and
gardens.
(8) Those who, without infringing any other
provision of law, pick fruits belonging to
another person in other to consume it on
the spot.
(9) Those who, without having been
provoked, use, not in public, against
another person any kind of abuse
referred to in section 307(1) of the Penal
Code.
(10)Those who carelessly throw rubbish on
to another person.
(11)Those who, not being the owners, life
tenants, lessees or tenant farmers of a
particular piece of land and not being the
employees or agents of any such person,
pass over the said piece of land or part
thereof if it has been worked or sown.
(12)Those who are found drunk or disorderly
in a public place.
(13)A registrar who infringes the provisions
or article 23 D5 of decree no. 66 -DF-237
of the 24 th May 1966 relating to the
record of capital execution.
Section R 368 – Simple Offences of the Second
Class
The following persons shall be punished with
a fine of from one thousand four hundred to
two thousand four hundred francs:
(1) Those who infringe any of the provisions
concerning the opening of agricultural seasons.
(2) Innkeepers and lodging –housekeepers
who keep their arrival and departure registers
in an incomplete manner or who do not
present it at the time prescribed by the
regulations or when they are required so to do
by the competent authorities.
(3) Those who allow to roam free:
(a) Any dangerous person of unsoun d mind
who is in their charge;
(b) Any dangerous or savage animal, and
those who do not retain their animal when the
latter attack or chase after passersby even if no
damage is done.
(4) Those who throw any hard object or
rubbish against any buildi ng, house or fence of
another person or into any garden or enclosed
area of another person.
(5) Those who, not being the owners or life
tenants of a particular piece of land and not
having a right to use or a right of way over the
said piece of land, e nter upon the said piece of
land before harvesting has been carried out.
(6) Those who cause or allow any vehicle or
any animal in their charge to pass either over
the land of another person when that land has
been worked or sown or is ready for
harvesting, whatever the season, or in a
coppice of another person.
(7) Those who employ in premises licensed
for the consumption of alcoholic beverages any
woman of less than eighteen years of age with
the exception of members of the family of the
licensee.
(8) Those who by negligence or carelessness
damage in any way any telephone or
telegraphic installation or apparatus thereof.
Section R 369 – Simple Offences of the Third
Class
The following persons shall be punished with
a fine of from two thous and six hundred to
three thousand six hundred francs:
(1) Those who cause the death or injury of
any animal or beast belonging to another
person, as a result of the straying of a
dangerous person of unsound mind or a
dangerous animal  or a result of th e excessive
speed, bad driving or overloading of any
vehicle, horse, draught-animal, beast of burden
or mount.
(2) Those who cause the same damage either
by the careless or clumsy use of a weapon or
by the throwing of a hard object.
(3) Those who c ause the same damage by
the decrepitude, dilapidation or lack of repair
or maintenance of any house or other building
or by the encumbrances or excavation or the
like on or near a highway without the
prescribed or usual precautions being taken or
the prescribed or usual signals being given.
(4) Those who use weights and measures
differing from those prescribed by the text in
force.
(5) The perpetrators of any disorder,
disturbance or unlawful assembly of an abusive
nature or at night which disturbs the peace of
the local residents; and the accessories
thereto.
(6) Those who allow any livestock in their
charge to feed on the l and, whatever the
nature of the latter, of another person.
(7) Those who, outside the cases provided
for in section 230(1) of the Penal Code, damage
or dilapidate in any way any highway or
encroach upon the border thereof.
(8) Those who, without be ing duly
authorised so to do, take from public property
other than public tho roughfares any earth,
sand, stone or gravel unless general usage so
permits.
(9) Those who, after assuming possession of
any stray or abandoned livestock, fails to make
to the Mayor’s Office or the village Chief within
three days a declaration of having done so.
(10) Those who infringe or do not conform to
any legally made and correctly published
regulation or order of the municipal authority;
Provided that the competent mu nicipal
authority may;
(a) By an express provision, classify a simple
offence in the first or second class;
(b) Bring about a decision of the supervising
authority classifying a simple offence of
the fourth class.
Section R 370 – Simple Offences of the Fourth
Class
The following persons shall be punished with
a fine of from four thousand to twenty -five
thousand francs, or with imprisonment for
from five to ten days, or with both such
imprisonment and fine:
(1) The perpetrators of any brawl or act of
violence of a minor nature not resulting in an
illness or an incapacity for work lasting more
than eight days, and the accessories thereto,
and those who wilfully throw any hard object
or rubbish on another person.
(2) Those who, outside the cases provided
for in section 290(1) and (2) of the Penal Code,
cause by clumsiness, negligence, carelessness
or failure to observe the regulations an illness
or an incapacity for work lasting thirty days or
less.
(3) Those who, when they are not hunting,
allow any do g in their possession to stray in
search of game.
(4) Those who, outside the cases provided
for in section 228 of the Penal Code cause by
carelessness, inattention, negligence, or failure
to observe the regulations any movable or
immovable property of another person to
catch fire.
(5) Those who damage any ditch, fence or
quickset hedge and those who remove dry
wood from any hedge.
(6) Those who, by any means other than
those provided for in section 157 and 158 of
the Penal Code, obstruct the per formance of
his lawful duty by any person engaged in the
execution of any law, regulation, decision in
the administration of justice or other lawful
order.
(7) those who, without lawful excuse, refuse
or neglect to carry out a service or furnish
assistance as required by a competent
authority either in case of the committal of a
felony or misdemeanour or in order to ensure
the execution of a court judgement or in the
circumstances of any accidents, tumult,
shipwreck, flood, fire or any other disaster; this
shall be without prejudice to any liability for
more severe penalties.
(8) Tho se who send by the post any
document or other article not authorised by
the texts in force or provide a false declaration
of the contents; this shall be without prejudice
to any liability for more severe penalties.
(9) Those who infringe the Post and
Telecommunication monopoly or knowingly
use an irregular installation for the
transmission or reception of any massage; this
shall be without prejudice to any liability for
more severe penalties.
(10) Those who use in a manufacturing
process any product that is prohibited by the
texts in force; this shall be without prejudice to
any liability for more severe penalties.
(11) Those who, having been present at a
delivery, do not make within the period of time
prescribed by the law, any declaration of bi rth
which the law may require; those who; having
found a new -born child, do not turn the latter
over to the Civil Status Registrar or, if they wish
to take charge of the said child, do not make a
declaration to that effect to the Civil Status
Registrar of their local council.
(12) Those who infringe or do not conform to
any legally made law and regularly published
regulation or order issued by an authority
other than those referred to in section R.
369(10) hereof;
Provided that such authority may, by ex press
provision, classify the simple offences which
they establish in one of the three lower classes.